Photograph of the Bist pore trom ibe HY DERABAD
MANUSCRIPT OF THE FUTUHU*S-SALATIN
(CThcoagh courtesy of Maulnn Muharomed Ghaus
aud De, Hanndallsb)
oe the cotcespondiag photageapt of the Fadia Office manuscript
‘ofthe Futzbe'rSalein 00 tbe Agra edition, publubed sn 1938

FUTUHU'S SALATIN

SHAH NAMAH-I HINDOF SAMI

TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Volume 1

ated by
AGHA MAHDI HUSAIN
MA (Punt) PhD (London) Dit {Sorbonne Paris)

PUBLISHED FOR
‘THE DEPARTMENT OF THSTORY
AUGARIL MUSLIM. UNIVERSITY

ASIA PUBLISHING HOUSE
‘NEW YORK,

1967 The Depentment of History
‘Aligarh Muslin Cavvernty
‘Agha Mahdi Husaon (1808)

[rEvEED AT CALCUTPA QUERTAL PRES! FREATE LTO 9 ANCLLWAN
‘nome LANE AUCUTTA at FVOLRED BY F  JAYANNGHE ASA
ase toes 29 rar LDrq sizrr tw York wy 10008

To
THE SACRED MEMORY OF
PROFESSOR MIRZA MOHSIN NAMAZIE

The unassuming but eminently endowed and gifted

‘ALLAMA and Head of the Department of Arabic &

Persian, Calcutta University, who took great interest in
this work but died suddenly on 15th May, 1966.

TRANSLITERATION

Tue cransheeration marks have been confined to the
singular forms only The plural being formed in the
English manner by adding ‘s', the transliteration matks
ate not considered necessary in the plural formas, ¢ g. sultdn,
sultans, qiai, qazis , amie, amres, Hindi, Hindus.

For the conventence of the reader the scheme of
ansleratton followed 1m other books of mine has been,
retained,

ABBREVIATIONS

Abdullah Yusuf Ali

Abdullah Yusuf Ali, Quran
Cembridge History of India
Cunningham Reports

Chronicles of Pathan kings of Debli
Encyclopedia of Islem

Exrly Turkish Empire, Abdul Aziz
Foundation of Muslim rule, Habibullah
Gackwar Oriental Seties
Hittorians of Medieval India

Hasan Nizami, Taju'l Maizir
Hyderabad Manuscript

India Ofice

Mahmud of Ghazna, Nazim
Studies in Indo-Muslim History

cbt Fiisbts
Tipit Bsibagi,

Tabegiti Nagi, Raverty

PREFACE

Tas Agra ediion of the Fatibu'sSalitin published m
1938, shorely after my return from Europe, was the result
of my study of the India Office manusetipt No, 895, made
in London, Ere long, I lighted upon the Hyderabad
manuseript and collated 1¢ with the photostats of the said
India Ofce manuseripe which I had brought from London.
Tn 1948 came into my hands Professor Usha's edition of
te Futibu'sSelifin ‘The fact chat the leamed editor added
turey-seven verses of his own in the footnotes of ‘his edition
to indicate the lacunae in both the manuscuipts was sugges
tive enough, Since the full strength of ‘Isimi’s Futizbu's-
Saliymn amounced to twelve thousand verses and the India
Office manuscupt ad given eleven thousand, five hundred
and twenty five verses only as opposed to the Hyderabad
manusetipe which gave eleven thousand six hundred ninety
thtee, I welcomed the gift of one hundred sixty-eight verses
and ancorporated the same in the correct text that T then
prepared, Ac the same time Linstitured 2 search for the
remaining three hundred and seven verses, My effore to that
effect—for I desited to proceed with that object to Tran—
attracted the attention of ehe Tate Professor Mirza Mohsin
Namazie. He promised me financial help if I undertook
a trip to ltan, But, to my great misfortune he died before
1 could finalize my plans for the proposed journey. How-
ever, he lived long enough to see the English translation of
the correct text which I had completed at an early date.

I translated all the eleven chovsand six hundred
rinery-thtee verses in Engl prose and I made my


x SHAH NAMAHI HIND

ttandlagon lneral and teue to the text as far as possible,
But I have not been literal ae che expense of the historical
sense behind the poetic expressions. One such expresston
ts sbansdam which oecurs frequently either 1n the beginning
or im the midst of che verses Sometimes Ihave avoided
translating i, considering 1t redundant.

I luted the queer geographical names used by “sient 5
and in the attempt to decipher these and locate chem on
the map I invited the cooperation of Dr. Z. A. Desal,
Superintendent, Archaeological Survey. I chank him for his
suggestions.

T also thank Dr, Yusuf Husain, ex-Pro-Vice Chancellor
and Dr. Nutu'l Hasan, Professor and Head of the History
Department, Aligach Mushm University, for their kindly
making the publteation of my Teanslation and Commentary
of the Futibu'sSeligin a concern of the Aligsth Muslim
Universiey.

T would be failing in my duty af T did not sntroduce at
this stage the renowned education and seholar Ds. Zakir
Hosain, “Vice Prestdene of the Indian Republie, who very
faindly looked into my manuscript of this work, 1 thank
tum for the same, and am very grateful to him

In the end, I crave the indulgence of my teadets
for my inadequacies of whtcls [am conscious, In the
expectation that cis unpretentious work of mine mill receive
favourable consideration 2t ebeit hands and might swim on
ses own merits ehrough streams of advette eritcism I place
st now before the Tribunal of the Publi.

Caeutte Unversity Manpt Husa
September 1966

INTRODUCTION

MANUSCRIPTS OF FUTUHU'S SALATIN

‘In these days when learmmg 1s at a discount and know
ledge is not in request Ihave set my hands to composing
the Futibu's-Selign which contains twelve thousand
verses.”

So says ‘Isimi, But neither of the ewo manuscripts, now
available, gives the full number. Both are defeetive though
each 1 supplementary to the other, The India Office
manuscript has some laeunae on folios 327a and 327b,
but the missing verses amounting to seven Jn each case are
supplied by the Hyderabad manuseript The foltos 2448,
agqb, 2582, 258b, 2592, a5gb, 2620, 262b, 263 and
260b of the India Office manuscript ate fughly damaged
and spoilt by humidity, and many more have been badly
Afiected, The Hydetabad manuscript too suffers from a
loss of some verses as well as of phrases and words. Some
Verses ate repeated in both the manuscripts for instance
the 10, MS. has repeated verse 907 alter verse gog and a
similar situation 1s noticeable sn the H. MS, verse 1781.
Some verses are found in reverse order for instance verses
4444 and 4445 in H.MS,F 158, And there are also a
few blank spaces on certain pages in both the manuscripts,
and at least in one case it 15 of equal size,

Evidently both rhe manusctepts are copies from an
onginal which 1s extinct. The Hyderabad manuscript 1s
‘more beautiful and 1s ammune from the ravages of humie
ny. Both are written in beautiful Nast‘alig character of

Ey INTRODUCTION

modern age. But the India Office manuscript looks older.
‘he vetses in both the manuscripts ate lefe unnumbered.
Ihave numbered the verses in the photostats on which 1s
based the present translation, and out of the copious notes
that I weote on compating and collaung the two manus-
‘cupts 3 few ate reproduced below.

Verses 388, 4136, 5303, 5878, 6128, 6704, 6801,
790. 7948, 8463, 8817, 8859, 8904, 9407, 7427+ 9455
and 11084 1n both the manuscripts ate not vitally connected
‘with the succeeding verses; and st appeats that a few verses
are missing in each case, Verses 718, 719 and 720 found
in the H, MS, folto 96 ate wanting in the 1.0, MS. folio
34+ Verse 1420 which w wanting in the LO, MS, folio
58 1s found in the H, MS. on folio 96. Verse 3706 on
folio 132 of H, MS. 1s aussing: 11s seen 1m the LO. MS
folo 117. On folio 138 of the LO, MS, seventy-four
verses at wanting. These are seen an the H, MS, folio
159. Again on folio 153 of the 1.0, MS. five vetses
{5000 t0 004 ste wanting but they are yielded by the H.
MS. folio 179.

These are but afew examples of the omissions and
discrepancies noticeable in both the manusenipts.

SHAH NAMAH4 BIND

THE Futibu'sSclagin ts the Indian counterpart of Fedausi's
Shab Namab of Tein, and Abdu'l Malik ‘Igimf commonly
known by hus penname ‘Isimi is the Indian Fiedaust™ who
came into the picture some four hundred yeats after the
death of the FiedausT of Tas?

‘Isimi came into the world three hundted and
ninety-nine Iunar years after che bith of the great
FirdausT of Tas. He was born in the city of Debi an the
year 710/232 durmg the reign of Sultin ‘Aliu’ddin
Khali. He had lose his father, whom he has lefe un-
named, in his rendet age. Trained since then in the
school of adversity he learnt 1n eourse of tume to stand
on his own feet ; and beeame a selfsmade man a5 5
indicated by his penename? ‘Isimi,t In these extcum-
sranees lus antecedents having remained obseute no one
ented t0 tecotd his ancestry. But he elaims to have had
a distinguished aneestty, He tells us that one of lus
ancestors Fakhru'l-Mulk ‘Isimt who had been a wazlt
at the Abbasid coure of Baghdad eame over to Dehli
where he was appointed wazir of Ilruemish. His son
Zakieu'l Mulk Sadeu'T-Kueim who became the court
secretary (vskildar) of Sulsin Nisieu'ddin Mabmid
son of Itutmish died early 1n the succeeding reign of
Balhan, He Iefr belnd 9 son ‘Iezu'ddin “Usiml, a
commander (s:pab-silar) in the army of Dehli who was

1 See Husain, AM —The Ferdaus of Indie, Proceedings of
the Indian History Congress (Lahore, 1940), pp 20% ff.
2 _An old town now called Meshed, near Teheran
13 For his nae see Agra edition of the Futitbu’s Salim p. 3.
4 For the meaning of ame see p 44... 15 Infra,

x SHAH NAMAH.1 HIND

the grandfather of the poet ‘Tsim, author of the
Futibn's Satatio.

‘Tzzu'ddin “Isieni was born in 63/1237. docing,
the reign of Sulgin Raztpa and was ninety-nine yeats of
age when in 727/1327 tinder ordets of the empetor
Muhammad bin Tughluq he was ‘dragged” on the toad
from Debi to Daulatibad He died on reatlung Tilpat,
twelve mules ftom Dehlk The poet ‘Isimi was then
sixteen yeats old , with Ins geandtather he was also
made to travel towards Daulatibid He reached the
destnation safely , and temamed at DaulatSbid fot the
next twenty-four yeats im che course of which he was
futher embittered against the emperot. Attnbuting
all ehe troubles in the country to the misdeeds of the
-zilim emperot he became disgusted and resolved to quit,
Indis in otder to spend the rest of his life at Mecea,
But he desteed to leave belund a souventt inthe shape
fof an cpte which might excel the Shab Nameb of
Fiedawst , for that Sbib Nameb weruien after ceaseless
application of over thicty yeats had immortalized pagsn.
Tein and coveted 2 pre hutonte and legendary petiod of
three thousand six hundeed and twenty years ‘Io
planned that lus Sbib Names Hind should contain the
versifed story of the Mushm empne of Deb, ehus
bringing in Islam 2s a pohtscal power in India.

CRITICAL ESTIMATE

Conspleced in the shore span of five months and
ine days (27th Remain 750-6th abs ‘I 752
Decembet 10, 1349-May 14, 1350) the Shab Namab +
Honda vecsfed compendium of the Muslim cone
‘quests and exploits in India ranging over thee centuries


SHAH NAMAE-I HIND wv

and half (390-750/1000-1349)—is a marvel of history.
Te las proved mote interesting and no less useful than
the prose works of Minhaju’sSirij, Zsyau'ddin Barant
and the Reble of Ibn Basgiea, Dr, Hardy's remark! that
‘Tgmi’s recension does not always agree in detail with
hae found in Minhij’s Tabegat-i Nagifi and in Barani's
Tiviblei Firoz Shab is not beside the mark for ‘Isi
wasan independene writer. Alehough he has not ack«
nowledged his Sources for the style of the Shah Namah
did not admit of such acknowledgment at every stage,
lie has mentioned the elassical works of Sadi, Nigdmi
and Firdausi and has indirectly referred to the works
of Amir Khusrau, notably the ‘Asbiga or Ishgie and the
Tughlug Namah, From all the above sourees and
many more he borrowed his information but he did not
take theit narratives vetbatim. He examined chest and
commented on them teproducing the whéle in his own
way s0 a8 to give it the look of his own outlay, If Dt.
Hardy's cemark® that ‘Isimi’gives artifacts rathee than
facts be credited, then sutely Amir Khusrau and Barant
would top the lis, It is true that “sim gives artifacts
in pare, in his account of Sulsih Mabmad, Sulsin
Raziya and Sulgin Mubmmad : ie was religion in the
case of Mahmad;. sex dn the cate of Ra:
innovations and conflict with the ‘ulama and mashikh
in the case of Sulgin Muhammad that had unbalanced
‘sini,

Unlike the style of Amir Khusrau, the style of
«simi is clear and simple and free from abstruseness,
1 Hardy, PHM, I, p, 110
2 Op. cit


= SHAH NAMAH ft HIND

le may well be said tbat “simi bas written history, not
poetry unlike Amir Khuscau who has wrtten poetry
fon the fabric of history. Unlike the wotks of Amit
Khustau which are intact ‘Isiau's Shab Namab-s Hind
has come down to usin a truncated and mutilared
form , but st has not Tose ell voday sts glamour and
suulty. Te gives lively and almost an eye-witness
account of imperialism under the Kaiji empire-builder
and of sts wreckage under Ibn-4 Tughtug, saying

‘Toro namesake vine-dressers an this garden did the
work of spring and autumn respectively. While the
son of Shiki populated 1 the son of Tugblug destroyed
se completely.”

Professor Avyangat's comment on the ‘ALT 1n-
sons of the Decean appeats a recensiont of ‘Isima's
Persian poetry to that effect.

‘The glamour of ‘Isimi's Shab Nemia Hind hes
further 1m hus satire of Muhammad bin Tugblog , and

1 Ia bis famous book Deccan and ber Must invaders (p 87)
Professor Asyangar says

“Aladdin's object 1m these vatious invasions of the Decean
and the facther south appeas to have gone no further than
making thers the mileheow for the gold that he was often mich
sw need of forthe eficient maatensace of bit army to keep

Hindustan free from snternal dstuthance and tavasion hy the
‘Mongols from outade
‘This 1s appatchtly a receoson of “Isam's Persian poetry to
that cicet though up til then the Fatubu’s-Salatyn had not heen
unearthed Addressing Malik Kafur on the eve of bis march to
‘Warangal the emperor sad

© my talented warrior, I charge you to march towards
‘Teng with a large army a your strival in the suburbs of.
‘Teling you should tobject che whole atea tmmmediately to effeee

SHAH NAMAH- HIND xvii

its historical value Ties in the fact that ic was weiteen
during che lifetime of the flim emperor and clouded
the vision of the succeeding chronicles. Studied side
by side with the Reple of Ibn Batgisa it would
enable the reader to discover some of the sources of
information utilized by that Moorish traveller though
hhe was not aware of “Isimi, ‘Isimi says chat the
‘gazis of the empire had declared war on the empetor
and had approved of his execution. The Rebla written
by one of the said gazis sounds a similar note, It
depicts the juriseefugaba, kbutebi and guleha—all
petsons belonging co the ‘ulami class, as victims of the
empetot's tyranny. Ie follows that ‘Isimi and Ibn
Basgdza both deew upon ehe heits of chose victims; and
collected data from ineecested sources.

Fitdausi's Sbib Nameb was a compendium of
multifstious foll-lote of Iria from che pagan times to
che advent of Islim. ‘Isimi’s Shab Namab beeame an

Tive raids, Afterwards, you should lay siege to the fortress
and shake ftto its foundations, "Should the Rii of Teling
submit and present wealth in money and elephants you should
relnstate hin under my sovercigaty and restore his dominion,
You should give hima robe studded with jewels and promise
him a parasol on may behalf with due regards, This done, you
should retum to the capital in good cheer, Mf the Réi wavers
awl delayt his wubmission yoo mot dnam van yute dogger and
demolish his fortess completely, Kill him and seod his head
along with his elephants and riches ro me."

The above extract {rain the Futibn'sSelisin contains an outline
cof the principles of the Kbalji imperialism, ‘That is, Malik Kafr
was omdered to note that the warhe wss going to wage in the
Decean was no wat of religion and no orders for the demolition of
temples and places of sanctity were given,


xv SHAH NAMAHA HIND

abridgement of Indian epteal folklore with the advent
* of the Turks. Many of the words and phrases in the
verses of his rzemadmab taken from the smagery of wat
reverberate the jingo of the sword and the rattling of
arms and scenes of loot, plunder and bloodshed. Again,
the razranimab in the Fatzbu's Salitin being an essential
part of a Shib Nameb lends 2 pecviist charm to we and
surcharges at with the mutant sprit of those umes of
sress and storm. And the mind of the author, it 1s evt~
dene from all kinds of verses init, 15 saturated witb the
religiospoltucal consciousness, chatacteristically medieval
Through his Shib Nameb ‘Isami secured a niche in the
temple of learning and fame and has been included in the
galaxy of medieval Iustortans. In spite of the fact that he
was pumanly 2 poce of folklote and composer of masnavis
for he had prior to the Futubu's Selafin wutten 1n vain two
diwans of sets of poems deawing inspiration from Fiedaust
and Nigiwi neither of whom being 2 historan—'T3mi
possessed all che talents and equipments of 2 historian, eg
an inquintive mind, access to all citcles of society and
culture nor excluding militarism, a caste for stones of the
past, penmanship, synthetic mind and above all che imagt-
nation of historian, Equipped with these and many
mote qualiues he plunged snto the sea of facts and did not
founder. He brought together different lands of facts and
Figures, aod lured them as eptodes with distioct headings.
But he dod not leave them there unconnected as Dr. Hardy
ts anchined to think, In fact, be built a fabric out of these,
bringing them all in right otder even without dates by
wareue of his rematkable bold on the sequence of events.
Asa result, he was never lost and never confused.


CONTENTS

PREFACE
INTRODUCTION

PART ONE
| SHAH NAMAH CONCEIVED
ARGUMENT
VERSES 1.288
SHAH NAMAH UNDERTAKEN
PEN-NAME OF ‘ISAMI ADOPTED
+ VERSES 289-357
Ml SHAH NAMAH INTRODUCED
‘ISAMI THE NARRATOR OF HISTORY
VERSES 388-603,
IW SHAH NAMAH LABOURED
MAHMOD OF GHAZNI IDOLIZED
‘VERSES 608.1177
V_ SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1)
FALL OF GHAZNI AND RISE OF GHOR

‘VERSES 1178-1951
APPENDICES |

A POWER OF GOD (Verses 1-9); (Verses 12-15

VERSES 19-24
‘VERSES 71-77

x

Ey

°

19

203

208
208

B MUHAMMAD THE PROPHET (Verses 83-84) 204.5
C KHWAJA NIZAMI OF GANIA (Verses 321 ff.) 206-7

ADDENDUM (Verses 575, 578 590, 591)

208

CHRONOLOGY

Or

ARRANGEMENT OF EVENTS WITH DATES IN

FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

Birch of Sulgin Mahmid of Ghsznt
His accession

His invasion of Ball

His death

Accession of Mutizau’ddin Ghoti to
the throne of Ghazot

His victory over Pithora and Gobi
His installing Qugbw'ddin Aibak as
viceregent of Hindustin

His victory over Jai Chand of Kanauj
His invasion of Kbwarazm and Ballh
His death

Enthronement of Quebu’ddin Aibsk
at Lahor (Labau)

His death

Enthronement of Shamsu'ddin
Tewemish at Debit

Enthronement of Nigiru’ddin ton of
Meoemish at Lakbnansi

Death of Nasiru’ddin son of
Meutmish

Ucutmish’s invasion of Bhilsa and
Ujiain

Death of Sulgin Heurmish

361/978
387/997
387/997
421/1030

569/3373
588/119

5388/2192
590/193,
Gor /1204
602/1205

602/1205
606/1209

607/ 1210
624/ 1226
626 /1228

653/1233
633/1235


on ‘CHRONOLOGY

(avn) Accession of Sulpan Rukou'ddin

Firoz Shah son of Heusmish 633/139
(xx) Accession of Sulgin Razsyate'ddio,

daughter of fleutmush 635/1237
(ax) Accession of Sukgn Muttzzu'ddio

Bahedm Shah son of Mrusmish 637/239
(ext) Murder of Reziya 638/1240
(sxx) Deposition of Sultin Murrzzu'ddin

Bahrim Shih 639/124
(exit) Accession of Sulsin *Aliu‘ddin

‘Mas‘éd son of Soltia Ruknu'ddia

Froz 639/124
(ew) Accession of Sulyia Nasieu'ddia

00 of Sulgin Ninca'ddin 6454/1246

(xxv) Sulkin Naneu'ddin marehes 10 the

eegion of Uch and Multia to eepulie

‘Monget savasion 656) 1258
(xxv) A son born to Sulgia Nasie'ddin 657 /1258
(xxvii) Death of Sulsin Nasru'ddin 665/126
(xxvm) Accession of Ghiyiyu'ddin Balan 665/1266
(xxx) Balban's expedicion sn the region

of Chiror 6656/1267
(2x2) Balban’s expedition sn the diecenxon
of Lahor 66 7/1268

(xxxi) Rebellion of Tughnl ac Lakhnaus — 669/1270
(asx) Balban marches to Lakhuaue co

suppress this rebellion 670/127
(cx) Accession of Sulgin Mutizzu'ddia
Kaiqubad son of Boghra Khin 686/1287

(xxx) Accession of Sulkin «AlSu'ddin
Muhammad Shah Khaz 694] 1294

‘CHRONOLOGY sau

(eaxv) His death 75/1315
(xxxvi) Accession of Stuhabu'ddin ‘Umar son
“of Sulgin ‘Alsu'ddia Muhammad

Shah Khaly: 715/315,
(ex) Accession of Qutbu'ddin Mubiiral:

Shah son of “Algu'ddin Khalyi 76/1336
(wxxvi) Accession of 'Khusrau Kho

(Nagru'ddin) 719(3319
(xxxtx) Accession of Gluydsu’ddin Tughlug

Shah 720/1320
(al) Accession of Muhsmmad Shah son

of Tughlug Shah palts3g
(el) —_Bnehconement of Sulgin +Aliu’ddin

Bahan Shih ae Daularibid 748/1347
(xin) Areival of Sulgin *AlSu'ddin

Balman Shah a¢ Gulbarga 7483349

One of these daces 1 wrong and two ate
doubeful,? That which 1s weong 1s 724 indieating. the
accession of Muhammad bin Tughlug, and those which
are doubeful are—the dite of Raziya's accession and
chat of ‘Aliu'ddin Khalji’s.

1 The date of Muhammad bia Tughtag’s accession according
to sims 7243 but tts wrong Smee he fixes five years as
uration of the reign of Ghuyiswddin Tughlug and at the same
lume gives 720 as the date of hus acceswion (verse 7403). The accese
sion of Muharomad bin Tughluq took place in 725, not 1n 724.

2 The doubtful dates are those whiclt are assigned. by ‘simat
to the accession of Reziya and that of ‘AlSu'ddia Khalp. Cf. C.P.
K.D. pp. 104, 156,


GEOGRAPHY IN FUTOHU'SSALATIN

GEOGRAPHY (literally science of the earth's surface) here
signifies the science of Indian soil ancloding her physical
and natural beauty, cienate, popolation and topography.
All this ts depicted by ‘Isimiim a poetic vein, But the
subjece matter of geogesphy bringing out sts effect upon
huistory and on the nature and course of events 15 not trace
able in the Futibu's Salatin. Of the Indian movotsins
Qarachal? (Himalaya) finds mention. Among the fills,
Firoz Koh and Koh Ali Shah and Koh Jd are mentioned
together with » few doubsful names like Hind Jarrah
Hind ‘Aly Vihan and Sanga Surikh. Floz Koh wa
another name of Bhokal Pahiei (nll), south-west of Kilo
hati, Kobs ‘Alf Shih was the name of a hull neae Sagar
and Koba Jad indicated the Salt Range, now in West.
Palastan,

Among the vers the following have been noticed:
Bla Biyah, 1. Beasy Abs Tiwi,1e, Tapers AbJhan-
want, s, Benithora, east of Gulbarga; Ab-t Jilin, ne,
Oxos; Abs Rev, se, che rwer Ravi, Abt Sare, #2,
the river Sani, Ab-t Sind ne. the Indus; Abs Karna,
sesthe Kistna; Aba Ghatab, 1. the river Prabba, a
tributary of the Kistns; Keenba, 1. the Kistna; Abi
Jano, ies the Jamuna; Aba Gang, 1c. the Ganges.
‘Then are mentioned many towns? and some villages,?

1,2 Teas dificole to sdeatify the uncommon places mentioned
bby ‘Isto Some tentative suggestions are bereby made


GEOGRAPHY IN FUTOHU'S-SALATIN x

@.g. Akar? Arka,¢ Abranwara,’ Almala,® Akalkot,’
Mahendes,* Burum,* Abr#® Kichin, Urdiin? Barram,
Bust? Balkatdra,! Bir Talkota,** Tablawad,?®
Tardal,

3) Akar? In the Burband Maier (p. 18) Akaris mentioned
a4 police starion (thana) near Tardal, s ¢ present Byapur
distaet,

4 Ack From the context ar appears ro have been a place
beeween Sigarin the Gulbarga distnet of Mysore and Mundbol.

5 Abrnwisa From the context it appears that sts Nabe~
wala, now Patan, Which was then the capital of Guyatit,

6 Almala: From the context st appeats to have heen 2 place
near Sagar,

7 Akalkot It-wasthe capital of the erstwhile state of the:
same name Now it isn Sholepur district of Maharashtra

8 Mabendstt The Barbens Madgaw (pp 17, 19) has Mende
Te may he Maindargi, just below Akalkot an soutbeeast

9 Burum, Thisssperhaps Moraa in Osmanabad district. of
Maharashtra, situsted a few miles to the north-east of Akalkot

to AbrKithun, These were probably two villages an the
vianity of Deblt

41 Urdiin or Ardun Pechaps tbis was a town in the country”
of the Mongols

12 Barram An outport of Suhund

433 Buses This was a town in Khurasan, Now st is included
tn Afghanistan

14 Balkatira [eu the same as Talkatora, south of old Dehli

15 BirorBhic  Formedlyin Hyderabad State and now in
Bhur dutrcr of Maharasbera

16 Talkors This mughe be tbe famous Taltkota, now in the
Buyspue district of Mysore

27 Tablwad: This may be sdentified with Petlad an the
Kura dutnet of Gujarat

18 Tardal? The Durbin Maen (pp 18, 23) mentions at as
4 place along with Jamikhands Ie lay a few mules tothe west of it.


xan GEOGRAPHY IN FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

Garkor.” —Taknar, Thala?! —_Jamkhay
Jara Chandgach, — Chunchwal@¥ — Dangri,?*
Dharis2” Komea,* Koer2” Kul Kandlise,"
tg Garkot: Ie may be adentifed mith Bagelkot. The

Burbines Means (p. 23) has Bagallot which lesa few mies to the

cast of Jsmkhandl.

20 Teknie or Matktc was perhaps 2 mountsin pass somsembere
between Br and Dhaedir, Dihsrurbetng afew mules southeast of Bic.

at Thila This eppeacs to have been a place im the vicinity
of Dehh, ae Ls

32, Jamkhandi: This was the capstal of the erstwhile state,
naw an Biyapur disttct

3, Jarati Baram's princed text (p, 58) 10 the corresponding,
assage bas Jalal, Hayy Dabur wl I, p. 732 has Choral At present
Rurdigewrdenaiye 7 a

24 Chindgach, This appears to be one of the two Chand-
sachs inthe Belgaum dusecie near Sholspar.

25 Cheachwils The Burhan Matyi (p, 16) bas Jnywal. Tt
ny be identified with Chbiowara,

36 Daogei, From the contest st appeats to have been some-
where near the ver Tapts, One Dangrt 1s sentioned by Hat
Dabur (pp. 61, 268, 321) co be sutuated nese Burbanpur, not far
from the Tapt,

37 Dharucs This ssn Bur disricr of Maharasbeea,

28 Komta: This may be sdeouiied with Kumaata, the
tary fortess of Rat Kama and was conquered by Sultan Muhame
road in the courte of his war with Babau'ddin Gorshasp and Ri:
Kampita

29 Kose, The Barban-r Masur (pp. 16-47) has Kotar, and
re any be wdentified with Kobt, situated now to the Medsk distact

30 Kubeim: Thuis a place in che cx-Satley atea of the
Paspb, ,

Bt Kandhar: This the Qandahar of Decean according. to
+ Macy, It bes an the Nanded dutcice of Mabarashca


GEOGRAPHY IN FUTOHU'S-SALATIN = xxvit

Koehal? Kalukbi,* Kalinaur,5 Katkaro,2®
Kalin Kamba ® Kampila.? Kotgir,® Kandhnylna,4

32 Kathal : This was a famous place of the Sayytds in
the 8th century Hyea (1th eentury AD) an the Karnal distnet of
east Punyad.

33 Kilukhans Sultan Motizzu'ddin Kaigubid had buile a
new axty beating this name, alse called Sbahr-1 Nau near the left
bank of the river Jamuna,

34 Kilt: This was 2 place an the nocth of Sit,

35 Kalinaur: Lying 15 miles from Guedatpur and about
‘200 males from Lahot and standing on tbe watershed berween the
Ram and the Beas, Kalanaur was then a place of great strategie
amportance and had remained under the possession of the Mongels
‘ull Muhammad bin Tughtug’s ume, He conquered it and drove
‘out the Mongels

36 Kalkaru From the context this appeats tobe immedie
ately below Gulbarga, Ie may be dentieal with Kalkal mentioned
by Fitishts in bis account of the Bahmant kings.

37 Kalyan ot Kalyam This asa place an the Bydat dittce
‘of Mysote whete an important Sanskrit insc aption of Muhammad
bin Tughlug has heen found

38 Kemba This may be adennfied with Kembhavt now 10
the Gulbarga disttict of Mysote, situated about 16 miles to the
west of Sigar.

39 Kampila also called Kampilt lay in the hulls south of
Dvarasamudta, comprising Raichut Dharwar and Bellary Te had
sotbeem annexed tothe empires Debi um! Muhammad bn
Tughlug’s ume

40 Kotgir, Ie wasan important stronghold of the kingdom
of Warangal and was conquered hy Muhammad bin Tughlug
‘(Wlugh Kin) during the ceiga of his father, It now lies in the
Nizamabad duttict of Andhca Pradesh

41 Kandhiyana This ts modern Kondhana, about 12 miles
from Poona. Its also known as Stahagarh,


xem GEOGRAPHY IN FUTOHU'S SALATIN

Gopilgic,# Layaura,( Miray,tt Malikhar,® Mandalgacht*
Mandhol, Mahadibari® Malwa,"* Hion'® Sarsiwa,
Haken,s! Sandhatan'™ (Sundlicen), Sarath," Sicam,'

442 Gopalgye According to Hodwwals (vol Il, p 83) thisis 2
place in Bharatpur disnet

43, LajuraThirts # mountain pass berween Echpuc im
Berac and Deogie Bat Hoddevals adenties re wieh Lusura, about
ro miles west of Daulatabad

44 Mira) Thi 13 a place sm south Satara disciet of Mahae
cashes

45 Mahlebies This may be wenued with Malhhed 1m the
Gulbarga dimer of Mysore,

48 Mandslgach This wa place lying an the Bhalwara disact
of Rajasthan, between Chittor and Bundt

47, Mandhel This may be denied with Modhel an Byspat
iseet few mes south of Jomabhandt

48 Mahidibiei From the context xt appears that it was
place lynig tmmedistely ouuside Daulaabad, northward in the
direc of Sagun pats

49. Mihwa Thi appears wo have been a place south of che
river Godavan towsrds Damkhers mentioned by “Itamt and inthe
weity of Bic

50 Hans Suess (Sesa?) These were two places n Sichind,
Sacsawa 13 place, afew mules northwest of Sshacanpuc

5¢ Heke Thurs Hukent dieser an the Belgsomm deer,
mentioned inthe Barban 1 Measr

52 Sandhatan Sundheen) From the context it sppeacs to
have been 2 plicelyiag between Bir and Drolstabad, somenhere
south of the Gedavant

53 Swath Thus may be sdentifid mith Sorath by which
sane the present Kethawad was thea known Even aow whe
regia comprising Junagath dirt s hnown 28 Sorath

54 Suam Thus sa place im the Gulbarga district of Mysoce
on the Wadt Secunderabad section of the Cental Ralway


+ GEOGRAPHY IN FUTOHU'S-SALATIN nix

Sacalgeh® ox Sitalgarh, Sarkhas,! Sorkerch.!* Sagan
Sunati,® Katgab,® Karcichor®t Kin Gich®® and a few
others. .

SUFI POET

‘Igimi is par excellence a sili poet. He wasa
born siff and remsined throughout his life, essentially
aman of the soul, Thatis, he nowristied the soul ro
the exclusion of his body; and suppressed completely.
his carnal self in order to attain union with God. He
locked upon God as the best of sufis do namely as
‘Friend and Beloved of the sovl.’ There are good
many verses in the Fatibu'sSeligin which show that

55. Satalgah ot Sitalgerh: From the context
this was 2 place between Deogir or Devagiti and Miraj.

36 Satkhos: This is the name of 2 famous town of those
days in Khucasin, Now it lies in Afghanistan ot Rossen Turkistan,

57 Satketch: This may be identified with Satkhe} shout
five miles from the present limits of Ahmadabad.

58 Sigar: ‘This is Sopar in the Gutbarga district of Mysore,

59 Sunieit From the context it appears to have heen a place
at ashore distance from Davlatabid towards Bidar.

60 Kotgsh or Khetaka: This was one of the scetions of the
city of Davlatabid, reported by Iba Battuta,

61 Karcchir: The Barbin-i Mazur (p. 22) in the correspon-
ding passage gives Kartpehite wbich may, be identified wien Karrie
chr, Itis described asa part of the thriteties of Hurnb or

3c. the founder of Wijayanagar. Ie appests that KareichGe in
question was no other than Kunjerakons or Anegundi of Hatihar.
He transformed it into Vijayanagar in 1336 AD, Vide Venka-
taramanyya, Early Muslim Expansion in Sonth Inds, p. 205.

62 Kan Gion or Kanga Gion: This was a village in the
Gulbarga or Bidar diteice.

appeats that


wx GEOGRAPHY IN FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

hhe believed strongly tn performing tubs (penitence),
abr (patience) and sbukr (granule), and he preferred
tolive ale of povetry (fagr) and abstinence (taque),
sported by hope (ey) and controlled by fear of God
(Rhenf) He aimed at obtaining wisal (merging in the
Divine Being), which was impossible without his eom=
pletely renounaing, selfove and pleasutes of the flesh.
Again, like the best sufis “bami believed strongly in
self dvcapline which was impossible ro strain without
the performance of namiz, rozs, zekét and bayy and
without st the same cme abstaining from indulgence
ta drinks and luxuries, Beheving an che sift tenet to
offer spiritual guidanee to chose who desired te ‘Isimt
held thatthe cask of Ins hfe lay an admonishung the
reader thtough presentation of the dars and cheir ner.
prettion, thus enabling him to pursue che path of
fellowstup and communion with the Creator, the
Almighty God ‘Isimi had che strongest fath in Him,
God was sn his eyes not only omnipotent, einniscient
and meredil but also a stern yudge of huinen actions
and the dupenser of justice. He believed that God was
Love, and love wasthe essence of all religious teachings,
‘sim who was a Sunol had a sof corner an his heate for
the mashiikh and had a spectal regard for the Prophet's
AL (abl s bast) including Hagrat ‘AIT whom he con-
sndered as the Leading Sof

FUTOHU'S SALATIN
oR
SHAH NAMAH-I HIND OF ISAMI
TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY
Volume I

CHAPTER I

SHAH NAMAH CONCEIVED
ARGUMENT
Verses 1-288

In the name of Allah, Merafal and Compassionate
FUTOHU'S SALATIN®

Taubid of the Creator, Great and Glorious

1-3 With the name of God, lord of both che worlds,
‘wise men commence a book. Every book which his opened
with His name has attained completion in the end. A pen
which does not insert His name in the beginning of a book
must be burnt because there ts no pen worse than such a
pen.

4-7. The best writee 1s he, who, on talung up the pen,
weites His name at the top of the book. Through that
coame, {his belief 1s fem, he ean eapeure the world. This
is my conviction. © God knowing man, weigh my word
and think over tls matter in your heart for a while, How
‘an you afford to forget Him who gave you conteol over
pen when you take te up?

89 Hes no other than God whose command makes
the weak pen work on paper, otherwise how could the hand
of a wniter produce a sound from a reed moving on paper?

1011 Through one stroke of His pen of ordination,
the world’s might and day eame into existence. He 1s the
creator of everything that exists and exerything owes its
exstenee to Him.

12-15 Through His wisdom He created in the course
of sux days not only the two worlds bur eighteen thousand
dfieent wotlds, Had He desired He would have ereated a
hundred chousand of such sktes, earths, stars and meadows

1 Luecally vietones of kings

4 FUTOHU'S SALATIN

tn one moment But Hts wisdom demanded chat the
universe be created according as He had ordained.

16-18 When He pronounced ‘be? His will worked out
instantly the Iay-out of two marvellous gardens—one 0
seeve for men of path as a supply base filled wich rubbish
and thorns, frutts and lowers, and another to serve 4 2
base of appraisement for our deeds and the place of recom
pense for our effort and neghgence.

1923. Ie contains seven eorturing grates for _punish-
ment and eight gardens for the reward of good deeds.
While the birds of good omen would go into the
gatdens, into te gestes will be thrown the ire-worshippers,
He docs whatever He likes while no one ss aware of (ty
human wisdom eannot peneteste this path Philosophers
are dismayed in shits patti, Who has the eoutage co question
His doing? They he up many acandle of Inowledge but
were consumed like moths,

24 Many lives have been lose in search of Him
bur none hit discovered the depth of this water,

25-33. Lam told that one day, in ancient times, 1850
Jappened chat 2 man was pursuing a snake sn order t0 Kall
ite Inthe course of thot hor pursuit many ante were
lulled As soon as that swiftfoored man drew close, he
struck the head of the snake wich a stick three of four
umes, Then che lead pounding suck was broken and a
living worm who was in che smek war cut into two pieces
The wounded snake bit the man, and hoth of them died
after a short cme. Reason sa

‘Swce the snake was venomous, tt was behiting
that the man became annoyed with at. And on
account of the wound which lid been enflicted

SHAH NAMAH CONCEIVED 5

on the snake by that man, the snake was justified 1€

ie attempted to kill the man, Bur what was the fault

of the poor ants that they were hilled in the course of

‘killing the snake? And what about that worm which

had lived comfortably saside the stick? What was its

fault cha 1t lost its life at the time of beating?

34 © sharp sighted reader, sf you look stenswely,
you will see every moment that which they show to you
and no more,

3536 What do you know about che amount of good
and harm done to a worthy or unworthy person by a mean
fellow? One person lights a Samp by means of a straw and
the saine sttaw scorches the eyes of another person.

37 The vety God, who hs cteated beneficial and
hhateaful things, sometimes puts sting and sometimes honey
tn then,

38 The same God has provided anes with honey liking
moutls, and the same God has established stings in the
mouths of snakes.

3948 Who has the courage to call in question this
matter by saying why and wherefore? God cteated the
opposite of all chings in order that the value of everything
may become known, In every bresse He lias installed feat
and hope—the former being heart-distracting and the lacter
soul exhilarating, He has created patadise as well as hell and
believers as well as fire-worshippers. He has created high
lands as well as tow lands and has roofed this earth with
‘ine slsies. Among the yattous things char He has created
may be counted sin and devotion, retribution and  geneto-
suty, Iife and death, extstence and non existence, night and
day, sun and moon, morning and evening, ower and

6 FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

thorn, inountain and dale, game and snare, fire and water,
catth and wind, pain and cure, oppression and justice
beauty and ugliness, fairies as well as demons and poot
dervishes as well as glortous angs, Know that whatever
eats, exntsthrongh His command. Which as the head
that can avord a blow ftom His polo-stick (changin)?

49 Each and all are subjece to His command whether
st be ehe ruin of an enemy or the prosperity of a friend.

go-5t leis mere yustce on His part, no opptesion,
tf He involves a friend 1n trouble o¢ al He exalts an enemy.
Even sf He kills s hing being thete can be no ground for
complaint.

52653 Sometimes He transfers @ certain person from
hell nto paradise and somenmes He cakes one from the
Katba into a temple, Nobody except He knows why man.
‘=a handful of eacth—is sometimes in the heights of glory
and sometimes in the abyss of destruction.

54°55. Evety drop of waver which the wind beings
down as also every particle chat grows ftom extth is
meant fot the livelihood af a living being; and on thar

lwveihood is kept custodian who earties out (divine)
orders.

5658 Sometimes He maintains life on earth by means
cof water and sometimes He employs the same water to des
toy a world, All of us—even the saints and prophets—
atehelpless when He enlorees His ordained will. In
‘matter no one has any control. If there is anyching like
control, ic amounts to nothing but helplessness,

59-62 Look! Both the wotlds, which have sprung
Irom His ordiation, are Wke a piece of an ordinary thresd
with two ends, The power of imaginati

wiek ies


SHAH NAMAH CONCEIVED 7

attributes tried its best to find out the beginnings of this
‘entangled thtead but failed utterly at Hast to trace its mcep-
tion. Power of thinking 1s ane of the tssues of His ordina-
ton. He dominates wisdom, intellects being. prisoners in
His chain

6364 You should seck from the leatned guides the
solution of every problem that arises. This 15 ptopers
otherwise, 1 am afraid, you will be separated like the
gnoramus from the company of wise men.

65 68 On our part we have to make submission amidst
humility, helplessness, apology and supplication while chat
mereiful King would show His grace, None of us will
remain in a uniform state. He alone was, will be and 1s,
This s all. ‘The world from end to end—new as well 25
old—is a drop out of the ocean of His cteative power. From
that drop—the deop of water as well asthe particle of sand—
the unwerse, from the fish to the star, came into being.

69-70 What 1s dus earth in comparison with the
niverse? O God knowing man ! And on this eatth what
ts the stature of man that he should praise Him? What an
absurdity!

74-74 When for the first ume ‘Isimi took up the pen,
a flame burst forth in his heart from bis thought. For a
while, he was bewildered and was at a loss to proceed.
Neither had he the ability to fulfil che duty of pratsing God
im the firse page ina befitung manner, nor had he the
courage to begin writing the book without His name; and
so face complere failure.

7577 Ik he revoked His name from he book, he
would be defearing the object of writing. So, under sheer
necessity, he drew the sword of excuses, and making the

8 FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

word of previous writers his shield he composed a few sound
verses whch cannot be called weak since they contain pure
tankid*

78 Udo not know whethee my writing thus book
‘would be taken by Hun asa service of 35 2 sin

7980 OGod, since Thou hast granted me che talent
10 begin, make my congue speak the rruth, s0 that I might
complete thus charming book and depart from tus world,
reciting Thy name,

Sr Ac che moment, when one draught reniains, 1
would be better that 1t were drunk sm Thy name.

82 When I sleep (in ste grave) shoner Thy forgive
nesson me, Let the holy Prophet be my snterceder,

Eulogum to she Prophet of Allsbs may God

Bless bir and accord bum peace)

83-84 Muhammad, who 1s serily the object of the
universe 1s certainly deaeet ro Ged chan Nosh and Adam.
In che garden of existence he ss che first floner which
blossomed dirough the breeze of the morning of deliverance.

85-86 The night of exutence is lughly Mumined
through his lights this pomnt is known fully to che research
mands (esbil-t tebgig)? Ue was chtough bis lighe that
the dawn of creation eame about. And st nas because of

Jus creation rat the breeze of mercy blew.
87 90. He was provided with a complete set of miracles.

Nevertheless, he was entided “Emperer of the world of

poverry’—a hind provider for che heavenly bodies and

1 Ie, docinne of the umity af God.

2 Literally scholars and doctors who pursue sesearch with the
object of asertaming the trath and extablubing certainty, But the
brave asbabes tabyig here sopmcn abs amluk or sufis

SHAH NAMAH CONCEIVED >

intereeder for the earthly beings, a hing of che prophets
and che chotcest of ereation, ‘Through hus merits the world
will obrain deliverance. In the tnemotl of che Day of
Judgment while every other prophet will be ratsing 3 cry
of Save my soul," he, for our sake, would say, ‘Save my
followers’.

9193 Hes the aim of this world and hereafter,
otherwise the sky and the earth would be Fuule, Who
can hide this very seetet when God Himself says, ‘Lawlaha’?*
All angels are enlisted as ius followets. His supeeme
posttion has surpassed chat of all the heavenly bodies.

Description of the might of ms'1i? of Mubammed +

Mustafa peace on bins *

9499 One night he galloped Ins horse and lefe clus
bloody earth. By the dust of hs foot the sky was bone
ured, and the earth being deprived of this honour bung
us bead low, On seeing lum the angels wanted to saeti
fice their lives, the lucky stars performed the mide? Gabciel

5 1e but for thee the world would not have been called out
of non existence ‘The namie indicated by the letter kaf un lenlakz
1s the emblematic name of Prophet Mohammad Lenlack2 1s
conndered part of a bades

2 Mfiray (\uerally ascent) ssgaifies Prophet Mubammad +
journey to heaven’ Iris believed that he was taken from che
Kaba to the sacred sites in Jerusalem and chen through the seven
heavens ro ‘the Sublime Throne and tnituated sto the spiritual
‘mysteries of the human soul su Space and Time If the Prophet's
Journey was a miraculous bodily journey the body was transformed,
tow a spincual finenes’, says Abdullah Yusuf Al (Quran, tr.
AYA.» 61) " ce

3 Te the stars suctendered themselves or cheir virtues 28 ant
offering to the Prophet


ro FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

held lus stitup joyfully to help him dismount, but be
suddenly disappeared from Gabucl too. When he crossed
the seeps of the munth shy he pasted the boundary of
Tune and Space. When he galloped tno or three stages
further he dashed straight to God the Limekin.*
xoo-toy He saw an open gate without an ush
When he went right in, he was given admuctance. He went
humedly ito the place of secrecy and obtaincd a noble
positon by rhe grace of God, When he distinctly tseard
‘the salutations and peace, be became sure that he was talh-
mg toGod. When he ltstened co the Holy Words, the
garment of bus consciousness was rent to pieces, At the
very Btst sip from the wine ol Divine Love, he became
antomicated. When given mote to dank he was off bis
feet, Divine favour eame to his ard and the benign Phy st
<cian put the pulse of his soul en order, Vetily he tecovered
and beheld what he bebeld, He heard ducinetly the
‘otdainments one by one affirmations, prolubitions, fasting
and prayer, medication, concentration, by) and 2

ro8-r11 All che holy ordatomenss fal into theee grou
first, those to be performed by the earehly beings public-
ys second, those ro be performed privately; and third
those to be performed at one’s option. That isall, Hu
‘supplication at the court of the Bz-Niyde* has opened
the gate of merey for us. All the time, be prayed for out
‘redemption and gor what he bad ashed for.

112-175 When that Prince of Apostles came back from
‘the Divine Presence ro his own private place, the firse ehing
hhe suck lus hand upon was tbe ablution vessel

Te was

2 Literally 4
2 Le God wh

tng no abode’, That, God
te want of norhiog and lacks nothiag


SHAH NAMAH CONCEIVED u

still shaking, When he went into bed, curiously enough,
bas bed was sull warm, ‘The same night this imystery was
tevealed ¢3 ‘Atsha, the mother of believers.

136-117 On the morrow when this blue dome opened
the gate of joy to the world, the Proper moved happily
‘out of his bedchamber and narcwed to the companions the
aforesaid event of the night exaetly.

118-ta2 To Aba Bake he first gave out the secret.
Then he described it to the other companions, When
this happy news reached his companions it looked as if a
breeze blew on the gardens. In this there 1s no room for an
amposnbality, since imposubilities donot ext with God,
‘The heart of the believer beeame a witness of this event,
another witness was the Prophet's narration. ‘To men of
piety, this event 1s perceptible. Should anyone express
doubt about 1t, he would be an infidel undoubtedly.

Tribute to the four calrpbs, the spiritual berstage
of Shaskby'l Islam Zaenu'l Hagq w'asb shera' w'eddin,
and applause for the second Alexander Alau'-ddunty3
wiaddin Abu'l Mugeffar Bebman Shib, mey Allab
perpetuate bis kingdom !

123-124 Through Aba Bakr a faithful witness of
the ecuth, ‘Umar a inan of justice, ‘Usmiin the sineere, and
‘Ali the hero of Istim, Islim* was consolidated, all chese
fout eaine to be its four pillats.

125 In the domain of truthfulness, justice, inodesty
and battle, no one has excelled these four men.

1 The term Sbarvat an the text sigmies Talim For the

srenng sd umortance of She's htry set the Tubing
Dynasty, p 358 & a

re FUTOHU'SSALATIN

126-127 Since st 1s not possible to give all of
these ments, 1¢ would be better chae im accordance wih the
proverb, Bheiru'l kelim ma gall wa dallat 1 sum the whole
up an one wotds ne. all the lour find mention sn the Quran

128° May there be a thousind blessings on there
holy duse ands thousand glad cidigs for shee sacred
tombs!

12g 131, When ‘Ali lele thus caravan, he enttusted the
burqa to. the old man of Basra. When Hasan departed
from this world, Abdul Wahid received the hovovr,
From himit passed co Fuzal bin Ayiz who smfused a
new spice snto the garden,

132.148 From Fuga, the Bhyrge cesched Ibrahifm som
of Adbant, who wore that gaement in an angelre manner.
From him Khwaja Mar‘asht obtained the Abirga wih reat
delight and happiness, Afeeewaeds tt was taken tn right
spuuic by Hubaira, who hatled from Basta, Then it came t0
Khwaja *Uld, aa Arab who traces bus descent from Damir
From him that auspicious garment was taken by Khwaja.
Ushg of the Chuhit stock. Subsequently Aba Abmad
Chishié acquired thar Kbvege which bad been spun by
the hours aud woven by the angels. Muhammad, who
was also of che Chisht? stock, then availed Iumself
‘of that auspicious garment. From hum it was received.
by Yusuf, che Chishet samme, When his soul went to

1 Discourte should be bref and based on evidence.

2 Luecally a piece of ol cloth Afuntabstlodrab, Lp. 654.

3, Dus or Diawar—a neh ety of “Itaq conquered by the
remy of "Umae [. Ie yrelded huge amounts of revenue and became
coown as Mibu'l Kufe (beauty of Kuta)

‘Abend bin Y'squb—al-Daldan (Naja),

Eo

SHAH NAMAH CONCEIVED 3

paradise Queba Chuhit who was the most popular and
beloved of the Chishi house obtained st, From Quybs
Clushei st passed on to the dignified Aslrafu'ddin,
commonly known as Zindani. From bum tt fell to *Usmin-r
Hirani who wore ¢ deservedly. From tum chat kherga
was secured and enjoyed for along tme by the saint
Mutinu'ddin Sanyari. From un Qusbu'ddin Bokkeyar,
commonly known as Oshi and Kaki, obtamed it. After
um it was worn by Fatidu'l Hagg, the refuge of longs
and sovereign in the domatn of sufism, From lnm that
tobe ol honour was obtained amidst a hundred glories by
our master Nigiwutddin. After lim Khwaja Buthinu'ddin
Ghottb availed uavself of we  Burhinu ddin gave wt to the
saint of the age? namely Zasnu'l Hagq who knew how
to do justice to that trust

149 What 2 wonderful kbirgal Ik came from Mubam-
‘mad (peace on tum) fo all these saines successively

150 Whoever smelt che sernt of this Bburge became
master of both the worlds.

351-159 From thot Abyega ths hon-heatied Sing* and
renowned monarch bis recived profound inspiration. He
1s an exalted and successful ruler of the age. His reign
has revived the glory of the reign of Isfandye? During
Is reign, Time 1s ashamed of oppression, through his
justice the atmosphere of the world has become modetate.
Since the echo of fus justice has passed the nine skies, the
spirit of angels 1s thereby revwed. He 1s a fottunate

1 Literally the satnt who marched on the night path.

2 Te ‘Alau'ddm Hssan Gangu Babmins, founder of the
Bahonana dynasty,

3. Isfandyar—a teem symbolic of divine power and gooduess—
hhere signifies « son of Gusltasp who wat a ling of ancieut Ie5n

4 FUTOHU'S SALATIN

young king gifted with the wisdom of old men, through
which he captures the reealeatrants of the world. Wherever
tus army marches, victory acts as his herald and conquest
ashis guide, ‘The head, which he wants to be severed
from the body, 1s severed by Destiny in a moment. ‘The
man whom he wanes to be imprisoned, 1s throttled at the
neck by Destiny. In this double-faced world he has be-
come unique, 19 successful warlare he has become con
spicuous.

360-174 King *Aliu'ddia ts the refuge of the world.
During his reign ehe aggrieved enjoy tchief. From his loins
has sprung Zafar Khiin whose patronymic 1s Abu'l Muzaffar.
This single man (King *Aliu'ddin) 1s equal in strength to
the strength of rwochundred armies since he 1s Babmant by
descent and Balan by name, He has revived the woeld by:
means of his generosity and justice, and the sky 1s resound
sng with bis beneficence. His army has, ike water, surround=
ed the earth; the lustre of his sword dominates the woeld
more than che sun All ehe achievements of rhe Iranians
tn the bardefield—the heroic deeds of Afsiaty’b in Titin:?
the justice and liberality of Fasidn; the abiding mementoes
‘of Nashienin in the world; the victories associated with
the sword of Ka'ts, the magnificence asiociated with the
name of Kimi all the brave deeds of Rustam in Mizindrin
and of Bizhan in che counry ol Armentas the message which
Sikandar heard Irom the invisible vosce; whatever the
talented Kalihusrsu saw an the cup of knowledge; the skill
which Siyfwush had feaent from Rustam; the marvellous

1 Tucan stands for Turkestan or Transoxisn2, #0 named fromm
‘Tor, the eldest son of Faridun, Hi futher gave im Toran 29 am
snhentance,

SHAH NAMAH CONCEIVED Ss

deeds performed by Gtdarz and Giv ; all the feats of
Jamshid, the fame for generosity that Hlitam had earned
in this world, the victories which Alexander son of Plulip
had achieved in India, China and Russia,* the heatt of
Bahman and the might of Isfandye at the time of batele
and repeisal—all these are combined in our king’ of the
present age. In addivion, he possesses the blessings
of Islam,

175190 When the tyranny of Tune handed over this
country? toa Zabba\t and chrough the oppression of the
Zahhiki horde human beings were tortured to death and
for six months in the country of Deogie the ery of suffering
believers rose from all dieections and out of the blood of
true Musalmans a second deluge swept the world, chen in
such a enitical condition you, O renowned king, girded up
yout loins to Wage war against the tyrant ® You unsheathed

1 Alexander posiessed no knowledge of China and Rusia
The farthest ety 12 Asta that he founded on the Jarartes was
tamed Alexandaa the Farthest, now known as Chotyend ‘sims
followed strictly the Iraman legend which attabutes to Alexander
the conquest of India and the subjugation of Chioa and Russa,
including, his march across ‘the Land of Darkness to the Well of
Life ar the world’s end” CAH, vol v1 p. 402

Thats, all the qualities and achievements with which the
Inezoes of ancient Tran are credited find expression ta the personality
of Sultin *Alsu ddin Hasan Gangh Babmant

3 Te India

4 Zabhak—a kang of the Peshdadian dynasty of Tein, proverbial
for his tyranny. Here Zabhak stands for Muhammad bin Tughlaq
and Zabbahryen for bis army and officers like ‘Imadu'l-Mulk Ssrtez

5, For the story of the ‘tyrant’s war with Zafar Khin (Sultan
“Aladdin Haran Gangu Bahmani) see che Tugilug Dynany,
PP 301-302.


6 FUTDHU'SSALATIN

the dragon like sword with which you severed the enemy's
hhead from the body.! You pierced huis head with a Lance
and crashed the whole of hus army. You liberated ehe
country froin his atrocities and reseued Islim ftom petsecte
tion. You freed groups alter groups of those who bad been
hheld prisoner 1n the hills and plains,

For this help of yours, rendered ro God's erestion, I do
rot know with which tongue I should thank yon adequately!
As long as U live, I ean but sing Your Mayesty's praises

© kang of the world, hencefoech ie will noe be
proper on the patt of the world to sing ptauses of any=
fone othet than youtself. To praise Your Muyesty fas
become the duty of all lugh and Jows particulaty so 1s
the duty of men of eloquence. Wise men unavoidably
invoke blessings on you whenever they raise their hands
1m prayer. When a baby's tongue 1s set for speaking
se would be wiong if « pronounced snytiung but your
pease, As soon as the hand 1s ser for weiting, 1815
incumbent on the writer to weite your peatse. fst.

igt-205 I have a secret ro disclose, f Your Majesty
would grant protection, 1 atm told when the wise Fiedaust
began to write the Sbib Nameb he received inspieation
from the shrine of Muggafi after recewing the help
of the Almighty God. When he begat to compose
verses he received wholeheacted support {rom the king
of Ghazal. Night and day Mabinid anxiously made
enquiries about hime Every moment he showed indul-
gence ro bum, nota while did he allow lum to be
disturbed. When Furdaust obtained such warm en-

+ Oper.

SHAH NAMAH CONCEIVED 1”

couragement and found the hing heartily interested in
the matter he took up the pen and began to dig up the
mine of jewels. ‘To begin with he secured the histories
of Tein and Tarin from the old hustorizns. Then he
satin a private ehamber and brought his mind into
harmony with lus genius. Later he wrote a charming
book and transformed the fireplace into a paradise,
Those who pluck flowers from this garden attribute it
to the celestial paradise. What a amuvellous con
he set up in the domtnton of literature | On 1¢ he struck
the name of Mahmid. If against che counsel of that
smuerly minster the hing had gwen an clephant-load
of gold from the treasury to the sharp-witted Firda
hhe would not have been put to shame tn the world.

206-217 Tam told that Firdaun’s objeet in eons
posing that book was to sequire the provinee of Ray?
from the king. When the poet did not get his objeet he
purchased a tumbler of barley-water in exchange for the
royal reward Neither do I see Mabmid an bus place tor
day, nor even Firdausi. That book, I notiee, has remained
asa memento of their names in the wotld. As long as
the world lasts, the Shab Namab will remain together
with rhe names of the kings it describes Since I—a
slave of Your Mayesty—have received God's favour and
found the way to ascertarmtog the truth through prats-
sng the Prophet, Inow pray the all knowing God to
make your royal heart kind to me. If Your Mayesty’s
favour were extended tome and sf were accepted as

1 Ray—an old city of Iran, now ma rumns On its ruins sn the
wicinty of Teheran fas sprang anew fown called Shah Abdu'l
‘Azim after the name of a ssint, buried there,

a8 PUTOHU'S-SALATIN

your panegytist, I would produce 1 gardenlike book
out of the Iustory of the kings of Hindustin. I will
decorate 1 with the royal ansigota and make 1t known
tmevery counteys As soon as thus book 1s completed
1m your name it will become current anong all—high
and low, The world will deink a toast in your honour
and che book will be taken from Hindustin to Gheznt

318-236 Dy wrung ehis book, O geacious kingt
1 sweat by the Alinighty God, who knows the secrets of
all hearts, ny object 1 nothing bue istebat,! Nesther do
{desire Raty from Your Mayesty, not the price of batley
water, since you give toa supplicant as much as the
spuing clouds give unasked for. Moteover, my object
1s to pay a tribute to you, O king of the victoriout
aumy, fot you have saved Istim from tyeanny.

OGod, forthe sake of Thy Godhead and foe the
sake of the profound truthfulness of the nghteous
Prophiet, make me attun my object whieh Thou
kknowese_ In the name of Mahimid’s love for AySz and
tn the name of the life of Ficdausl, maker of mgt
aslong aseven a single coupler of the Shab Namab 1s
uolzed and as long as goodness exists im the wotld, O
God, pray, keep the ang an full power on the Aiyén?
throne 3s defender of the fart of Ahmad,

4 That , following Firdaus and waing the Shab Namah of
Hindustia on the lines of, and sn continuation of, the ‘Shab
of fa

2 ARS > prayer for the prolongation of the ceiga of
Soleén “Alou diin Hasan Bahan Sha,

3 Keyan theove w an expression for royal power, taken from
the ttle of an ancient ruling dynasty of Teen

lame


SHAH NAMAH CONCEIVED 19

Untering complaint at the royal court against the
age and people of the age. :

227-247 O king, if before now this sordid world
wete as mean as it is today, not a single man of skill would
have become renowned in this faithless world, Neither a
Shab Namab not a Khsmse, nor any poetic collection from
ancient poetry would have seen che light of day. Even if
a masteremind of skill were to appear, he would have been
diven to insanity at the hands of the noisy fools, Alas |
the whole world has become a frand in its bazaar ruth
has become a rate commodity. The only righe point about
the world coday is that eruthfulness has disappeated from
the men of lestning. He whose tongue moves today is con
sidered exclusively the talented man of the age. Such people
ate time-setvers, neither firm in war, not in peace. With
4s hundred applications they learn a words they display it
‘and boast about it at every party. They male noisy boasts
and look upon a teacher as a pupil. If they achieve an
object, they become venomous fo others. And when they
attain a position, they become the stone eat beeaks the
glass of the happiness of others. None has remained now
in this faulefinding world except the uncultured and the
garrulous. Through the crookedness of their minds they
cut down a correct word as if by a sickle in every party and
assembly. They express doubts about indisputable verses,
‘They erase eloquent compositions. They know nothing
abour word and meaning; nor is there a trace in them of
theit understanding any mette. They become arbiters!
beeween Nizimi and Khusrau, Should anybody advise

+ Thatis, they act like a judge to assets the liteeary achiever
‘ments of Nizimi of Ganja and Amie Khusran of Dehli,

20 FUTOHU'S-SALATIN .

them they would noe fisten, Sometimes they say, “That 1s
Detect than ehis's and sometimes they say, ‘This 1s unfit,’ In
thei own opinion everyonc among themselves 1s an Aba“Ali,
This egotsm on heir partis chrough stupidity. If afer a
generation this fool appreciating world allowed a talented
‘man to become prominent, they sould belitle him by means
of sateasms. As an unavoidable result of the noise made
by these fools, che talents of a wise man remain hidden,

248-259 How well did that talented man of Ganja
who composed valuable poems like a teeasure* say when he
fele snspired

“On an apptoptiste occasion I hive many valuable

hts, but I do not display them unless some one ex
presses a desite for them,’

‘When a buyee of peatls has closed his eyes like shell,
pestls eannot be sold im such a dull marker. When the
market a8 full of glasesellets, the jeweller should sea! his
box of pearls From these people of crooked vision and
blind conscience, I sce no escape except in dissociating
‘myself from them I should secure a place of seclusion fot
some ume since Tama guest of eins country for a few
‘months. Thaveremained a hosrage, ity-bound, in Fhndustin
1p ordet to complete this book of royal taste (Shab Dameb).
{ totend journeying into another wostd. I have developed
another des in ay head. I have set my mind ‘on
that work which has mspued me; and I shall ly
down my Iden us caste which 15 soulnouribung, Av
‘ton at finsh hus books I shall put an end to my activites,
To be able to complete this soulinsping book, vabuch es
Wrevented me from proceeding towards my projected

1 See verses 3684372 mf

SHAH NAMAH CONCEIVED Ea

journey, [ am secking, in addition co divine help, the
support of Your Majesty.
Grong caution on adopting the path

260-263 In this path Thave been unable co make a
Uucourse, due eluefly to the weakness of my belief. Like
birds, we came into this meadow. Into this farm we came
as exters of com, What kind of corn?—the com which,
as soon as Adam saw ut, he readily purchased even at the
cost of hs paradise. If we obey Hun faithfully, this coca
will not be forbidden to us®

264-266 Thanksgwing 1s incumbent on us But on the
contrary, we take complaints, We ate prone to be ungrate
ful to our benefactors, We would not be contented with
anything,even sf, on che table there were manna and quails.
We say, ‘Where are leeks? Where are horse radishes 2",
‘The whole yeat we are accustomed to behave in this way.

288. ‘IsSini, night and day, i season and out of

season, be grateful to the dervish as well as to the king. Seek.
froin the rable of kings a erumb of bread and from the
straw-bag of a dervish both the worlds How long will you,
ike women-folk, bother abour name and shame? Keep
aloof from everyone, lugh and low In order to learn
decortim you should look for a man of decorum. Who can
earn decorum from an unseemly person? Whatever cle
‘man of decorwin tells you as improper, do not do What

4 Le this path ts so dehcate that 1 sm unable to explain it
tn spite of my great efforts.

2 These verses contain a reference to the belief that Adam
had exten che wheat which had been forbidden by God with the
result that he was deprived of che bounties of paradise Therefore
“Tsamaumapretses on the teader the need for acting and moving 1m
sezordance with Divine wall,

2 FUTOHU'S SALATIN

ever 1s done by che ill mannered and does not appear to be
good, avoid, You ste not acripple. Go cound che world,
making a tour of 1¢ with the object of acquiting experience.
Ac every step your labour wall be rewarded + every moment
you will be given 2 ereasure of secrets, On going out of
seclusion, you should put 2 chain on the foot of yout
passions, closing both of your eats, both of your eyes, and
both of your lips. Joys and sorrows of the world should
be mmateril co you Nowhere must you cite anyching
fut the name of God. Look for nothing else otber chan
the beneficence of God, otherwise dangets will abonnd in
every look ; and che congue will beget untold dangers.
Pass carefully ehrough the seven stages so that you
should reach the destination easily ike Rustam arriving 2¢
Mazindeéa. Should you abstain from evil in this journey
you would achieve your object and atrain success. It would
bbe wrong on yout patt to ateerapt going near a road thar
might divett you from tbe right path, Go cound the
world tmoedtarely ike a cesolute man, How long will
you remain in rhe cottage an che manner of widows?
Pluck a fresh flower feom every garden from every red
wine taste a Inele, Perhaps you mighe contact a person,
able to poor materah and spiritual wealkh into your cup.
Ifyou be tied of society and if yout mind be deawn
rowards solitude ansidst the mountains, you should go into
deep meditation froma which you must not emerge as long 35,
you live, If ia ehis manner you pursue this path, you might
be taleing and rravelling at one and the same time, You
‘might obtain seclusion in every thoroughfate; and ia spite of
seclusion, your mind might travel far aod wide. Pursue
this ll you are able to sce the glory of God in every
direction—Iefe, right. below, above, before and behind.


SHAH NAMAH CONCEIVED” 3

The commentary at the end of each chapter in this book
tndertakes to make up lee-way discussing the emergent issues
aud problems whieh remained a closed book to the poet
because of the limited range of his outlook and the restric
tions of a Shah Namah,

. COMMENTARY

In the opening verses (1-80) ‘Isimi lays stress on tanbid
~che existence of one God and His great powers which
ate beyond human comprehension, He emphasizes the mys
terics of life, universe and death, He asserts that despite
these mysteties and che ftequent misforeynes and mishaps
har befall mankind and, despite the oppression of the
strong over the weak, aman must never lose faieh in God
since everything chae cakes place inthis world is sericly
according r0 a divine scheme.

Buc eaubid, ro be properly underscood, should be followed
in che Sura Uhlzy ot Sura Tanfid of the Quran:

‘Say: He is God,

The One and Onlys

God, the Eternal, Absoluce;

He begettech not,
Nor is He begotte
And there is none
Like unto Him.’

Thisis taubid which is the negation of all ideas of
polytheism and anchtopomorphism and which establishes
His absolute existence and Personality. Finally it emplia-
sizes che fact chat all depend on Him while He depends
on none—neither on persons nor on things?

1 Sara ex
2 ALYA.Q.p. 1806,

4 FULOHU S SALATIN

The meaning of taubid 1 further expounded by Hazrat
*Alt in a khutba of bis. Am extract from it 1s translated
below.

“The first and basre_ principle of religion 1s to hnow
Hun and the wue knowledge about Him consists in
believing 1m Hum, and correct behiet sn Him 18 t0
appreciate His teubud (That 1s, He 18 so absolutely pure
tliat nothing ein be added to or subteacted from His
Being) And the highest apprectation of t2wbid amounts
19 one’s complete devotion to Hlim, and perfect devoron
ro Hun means that He 1 above all aterbutes,

‘One should cealize thar tere 1s no difference
betweeu His Persou and Hits antbutes and His attr
utes should not be differentiated from His Person,
Whoever accepts His attnbutes to be other than His
Person setuslly forsskes the ides of tanbid (unity of
God) aod believes in dualey (He and His attuibutei)
Sucli a person, an fact, behieves Hum to exut in Parts
(That 1s, having different pares of the body—one thar
sees che other that heats, a third thar feels and s0 on)

One who holds such a faith eannot have a reue
concept of God, be 1s ignorant and will always try 0
believe 19 some creation of Ins umagination as his god
And whoever holds such a belief accepts. limitations in
‘Hs Being and confines Him to a place ot to parneulse
powers and attributes and brags Him in Jevel to His
teatuces

To beheve that He's invested with characteristic
of parucular place (Heaven or Earth) and to pownt
towards Hi accordingly or to believe that He ts res
meted (0.3 special pontion of occasion of to consider
thst certain place of time can extst without Hum and


SHAH NAMAH CONCEIVED 35

can be void of His Omauscience and Ommipresence—
such a bekeé will result in assigning Godhead to a
numerical unity. (That 1s, He as Tike a nuinber which
can be added to or subtracted from )
sis existence as eternal He did not come into
being im.some period of rime, nor was He created. He
1s with every body but not physically and bodily He
1s away from everybody but not by way of bodily
distance or of being unconcerned He acts and works
bur His action oF work does not entail any movement
nor does it require help of snsttuments HE IS ONE
AND ALONE because He has no companion who
would keep His company or whose absence He would
aniss "2
To understand propetly the verses 22 15 of the Futdbu's
Salayin the reader may refer to the Quran which says
"Your Guardian Lord 1s God who cteated the hewent
and the earth sn six days and ss firmly esta-
blished on the thtone of authority”,
‘The creation in six days 1s metaphorical Abdullah
Yusuf Alt says that the days of God refer not so much to
lume as to the growth 1m us of a spmntual sense, a sense of
sin and a sense of God’s mercy.
Further 1 is announced that ‘a day in the sight of God
1s like a thousand years of our xeckoning’*,

+ See Hazrat ‘Al's Bousbzt enutled Nab! Daleght, pp
97101, Lahore, AD, 1956 Also sce Engluh translation of the
same by SM. AshattJafery. AD 1960, pp 1-2

2 Sora wu verse 54

3 AYAQ p 355

4 Op at,

26 FUTOHU'S SALATIN

Reference may also be made to the following verses
tm the Quranz tls 1 that ye deay Him Who created the
earth in ewo Days.t He ts the lord of all che worlds. He
set on the eth mountains standing fim, Ingh above 1,
And He bestowed blessings on the eatth and measured
therem all chings eo give them quutishment an due pro-
portion m four Days in accordance with tlie needs of those
who seck sustenance, Then cuened He to the heaven when
was smoke, and said co st and to the eatti. Come ye
rogether willingly or loth, They said. We come, obedient,
Then He otdained chem seven heavens 1m ewo Days?

There 1s nothing conteadtetory sn ehe above statements,
the number of days being anetaphorical,

Then 1 should be noted chat according. to 2 saying of
the Prophet these ate eighteen thousand worlds ‘Tsim
‘fers to cus saying when a verse 12 he speaks of eighteen
thousand diferent worlds. He means to say that besdes
hs mundane world and hereafter thicte ate many mote,
for instance, nisit the lnuman world, melakit the workl
of angels and Jabit the divine world,

Verses 19-22 1n chs ehapter comtain a reference to (1) the
seven gates of hell and (1) the eughe gardens or patalses.

Regarding the first pore the ceader may refer vo Sura
xv, verse 44 of the Quran which says: ‘To che Hell
ate seven gates!

As for the second point v¢ should be noted hae inctease

4 the number of paradises or gardens brings our the baste
‘caching of Isim to the effect that God's “mercy 1s greater
thon His weath, The phrase ‘eight gardens? as it stands
1m verse 19 signnfies bliss of different kands an abundance.

Y Sura xh, verse 12

2 AY AQ pase


SHAH NAMAH CONCEIVED 7

Afterwards, ‘Isimi culogrzes the Prophet as ‘emperor
of the world of poverty’ (verses 87-90)

Irshoutd be noted that while composing these verses
‘Imi had im view the famous saying of the Prophet:
al fagr- fakbrt (poverty 1s my pride), which 1s explained by
Hifiz Shirazi in the followmg verse:

Danlets fag Rbudiyi baman areini dir

Kin karimat sababa basbmat-o tamKin-s man ast!

(Grant me,O God! the west of poverty for 1t 15 2

grace whieh sceures me high postion and dignity.)

That 1s, Muhammad preferred poverty to worldly

riches and erushed all mundane eraving and urge of the

flesh, He never lwed a life of ease and comfort. Rather

he fasted, For some days in the week Ins oven reinained

unkindled and he went without food for some nights

although there was no dearth of means, He passed his

days steenously and spent the nights for the most

pore in prayer (namiz)*. He used to pray to Allah,
saying

Allebumma abyéni muskinan wa amstni miskinin
swabshurei fi-zwmrats | masikin (O Allah, make me Ine
the hife of a poor man and make me die the death of a
poor man; snd resurreet me amongst the poor people.)*

He used to mix freely with the poor and had great
affection for them and identified himself with them.

1 ‘Abbas Qumm:-—Ssfinateo Biba! Anwar vol tt, pe 378
Naat. 1355 H

2 Khazram,S M—Tankb-t Umams'l Islamis vol. 1 pp
222-230 Caro, AD. 1921

3, Same 28 footnote x

8 FUTUHU S-SALATIN

Then cwenty-cighe verses (94-122) deal with mu'riy
—2n important event which rook place on the might of
ath Reysb, one year before Prophet Muhammad's byrat
from Mecca. The process of che mn'rij as gwen an the
Quran (Sura xvu, verse a)as an evidence of the highest
spiritual uphftment attaned by his soul, mid and body
tamultancously, From the ma ip, at xs believed, he broushe
che Ebirga, symbol of che highest development of human
soul and mind (verse 129)

Malang full use of the idea behind the kbirge ‘Is
speaks Iypotlitically of lus projected Shab Namab wlueh
would excel all othee works of chts kind. Soaring. biger
than the material world wluch usually forms the reson
die of a Shih Namah simi's Shab Nameb would
peneteare into che domam of spre and soul Hence +
Targe number of vetses (129-151) desing with the story
‘of the kbirga which, beginnmg with Hazext ‘Ali, passed in
succession to many saints. Finally 1t devolved on +Aliu'ddia
Hasan, founder of che Bahmani dynasty.

Tn verse 199 there 1 a reference to the legendaty
material bidder an che Pahlavi language chat Fiedausi ttaced
and used while composing che Sbib Nameb of Tein, Such
material 1s not traceable now except an the shape of ate
and abstruse Yatgir-s Zarirén ot che Memorrs of Zaria
also called Sbab Nimaba Gusbtisp. Another work of
smilar nature 1s called Karnimakes Artakbsbira Papehin
oc the Book of the Mighty Deeds of Ardashir, son of
Birbak. This 1s satd to have been the shectanchor of
Firdausi

The verse 201 contamms a pun, The word iusbkedeb
(Gre-temple) primarily refers co the faet that Tein was
‘once che country of fire-worshippers; and itubkedab also


SHAH NAMAH CONCEIVED 29

sigeufies a book of Persian poetry. It as also + biographical
dictionary of Persian poets.*

Tn verses 204-205 ‘Isimi apparendy blames Hasan
Maumandi without naming him. Ir ts true that rhe latter was
very exacting sn lus dealings as wazir He was not only a
sirict disciplinartan but also highly eeononscs hence the rcen-
sation, But Firdausi’s ease at the court of Sulgin Mahmad
had been matred by the jealousy of his rivals, the most
powerful amongst them being ‘Unsuti, the poet-laureate.

The verse 219 contains a reference to the story of
Firdausi, After working steadily for about thitty-five yerts
he completed the Shib Namab of suxty-thousand verses at
the age of sixty. But Sulgin Mahmid hisd meanwhile
changed lus mind, He now offered sixty thousand silver
dishams (circa 36, 400 cupees) instead of an equal number
of gold mohurs (circa 5,60,000 rupees). Firdaust was
enraged. When the inoney reached him he was in a publie
bath at Tas, He disposed of the whole amount immedi
tely—a third of i he gave away to the keeper of the bath,
another dued to he messenger who had brought the money
and the remainder to aman who brought him some barley-
water (fuga)

Bapadash gany mari dar gusbad

Baman juz baba fuga -+ nadad
(Toteward me the Sult3n opened lustreasute, but he gave
ime nothing more than the price of a cup of barley water.)

Verse 24q makes a brief mention of Iba Sina? whose
real name was Abd “Al Husa bin ‘Abdullah bin Sia

1 Cf Levy—Persan Literature (London p, 97)

2 Sina symbolic of God's Light and Revelotions being dential
vith Moune Sinat where Moses recewed the Divine Law AY AQ.
Pp 876 1758


Ps FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

His by-name was tbn Sind wlueh, rendered into Hebrew,
became Aven Sins. Qut of spect for him his contem-
poranies in the east referred to him as al-Shaikh (4sb-
Shah) and abRois (Ar-Reis), and an the west the scholas-
tics called lum Princeps Philsophus and Priceps Philo
sophocuin (the great Master and Prince of the learned)

Bom of Persian parents at Kharmaydlan near Bubs
10 (368H) AD 80 he wasa model of Iranian genius.
‘Avthe age of sixteen he attained such a dtseinguisbed
superiority chat ‘physicians of the highest eminence exe
roread medicine with tm and ¢o learn those moles of
treatment which he had discovered by pesceice’. At the
age of twenty-one he became a recognized author, About
thus tume occueted the death of his father whereby he was
depewved of that protection whch fhe had hitherto enjoyed
against lus eneautes. He was compelled co Ree from Bubbiiea
and went to Gurgan (Jurjén)! whence he travelled to Ray,
Hamadan and Isfahin successwely At Isfahtin he pro-
duced lus masterpiece entitled Kitsbisb-Sbyfi%—ma medical
encyclopaedia and a metris medica, aud shorely after he
wrote another book called Qeniin® This was followed
by a dhurd book equally great ond useful entitled Keble
Ibn Sing. He proved an mdefangable trateller as well as 2
weer, and continued wring. on sundry copies and
wele on diferent aspects of diferent subjects The

1 An ancient towa atthe south-eatt corner of the Caspian sc

2 Kusbw'sb-Shife was yublubed 1 Teleran in 1313 20d
t-Qenua in 1284 Hiya

3 Albo hiawn as a-Quna
mediane.

4 That plorphy, metaphynes, muse, erature, phone?
ve, medicine, msthemanc, theology, sulin an sociology mnelade

Aeals with the canoes of

SHAH NAMAH CONCEIVED 3

exact number of books written by him has nor been
ascertained, for many were lost and even burnt. Brock-
elmann® has counted about one hundred extant Arabic
manuscripts to his eredie and thirtcen® others have been
recently published at Teherin besides another work of his
on medicine called Ishirdt and a few other teatises which
hhe wrote during his 4-month-ong imprisonment at Hamadin,
‘Though a pleasure-loving man he had so
life andl cravings that he became the ideal man for almost *
all succeeding generations. And, according to an Arabic
saying—weljabiliine Le-ablaltdm-e a'da’f (ignotant people
ate enemies of men of leacniing)—the people of his age,
unable to appteciate his true worth and value, considered

fined his


2 FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

Jum a magician, However, at was eonceded that he had
achieved a synthesis of the culeure of his age, In the
domain of philosophy he was the fitst among the Muslim
pluosophers ro have had a coherent aystem of thought He
evolved a new philosophy in which Atistorelian and Neo-
Platoic theones were combined with Persian mysticism.

He died in 429 H (A.D 1037) at Hamadin where
Ins tomb sull exists.

In verse 278 the expression aft Rbwin (literally seven
stages) signifies seven stages of the distance which in the
‘eoutse of bis youtney Rustam had covered 1m order ro secute
release of Karkd’Gs who had been chained by the demons in
the fortress of Mazindrin neat the Caspian sea, He eovered
the distance of seven stages in seven days, encounteting at

‘each stage untold dificulues, all of which he surmounted

at last,

CHAPTER J

SHAH NAMAH UNDERTAKEN
PEN-NAME OF ‘ISAM! ADOPTED
Verses 289—387

Speaking of the glory of Poetry and talents of Poets

289-292 Let us reflece on the word sakhun! which
consists of thee alphabets—sin (U), hbe (¢) and niin
(uy Je The crown-like letter sin ( (y+) constitutes its head,
indicating that intellect follows sathun like a slave. The
letter bbe ( ¢) stands like abel on the kingly body of
sakbn symbolizing. the poet's equipment to conquer the
world from east to west. The letter niin ( y) resembling
a surrup signifies the ability of the poet to rule the
universe,

293-296 I undetstand that the word sakbun was orig
nally sahb3 which was transformed into sekbun secoeding,
to the rules of Arabic grammat.t I have heard from men
of lerers chat sekbun was a peael in the ocean of divine
power. Schbun came ftom the sky to the catth and it
inspited the sky as well as the eatth with dignsty.

297-298 Poeety expresses utself chrough wisdom, and
the gift of poetry isthe distinctive mark of humanity.

1 Sabbwa (also waitten sukhen or sukbwn) 15a Persian word and
may be taken a3 synonymous with the Englsh word verse Both
the words mein metrical composition nr poetry in general which
reaches every part of the world and conquers every human heart,
Irrespective of easte and ereed Like the lerers—simkhe and ain
of subben—each being sigmficaat and pregoant with meamiag—
the v,eyr ands of verse signify Victory, Enchantment, Radiance
and Spheres eux (earth and heaven) respeenvely,

3 Intact, no rules of Arabie grammar are appheable here
Sekba (Iuterally charity and generomty) which 1s Arabic fas ne

cxoecion wth ina ot shan et salen (weaing, pots
which 15 Persian, an

3s

36 FUTOHU'S.SALATIN

Many people who possess no pocuc sense are garrulous;
they are worse than animals.

2g9-30r Ifa simpleton holds his peace and remains
mute hike the cow, will nor he possible ro read bis charac-
tet correctly. I, for one, will prefer an improper word
‘usted by a vise man toa thousand blessings insohed on
sme by the ignoramus Only a mind which 1s endowed
with 2 sense of appreciation of poctry may he regarded
as human mind (possessing a high soul), while others are

Ike clay.

302-308 A poct prefers a judicious critic to a whole
world, and an ingenious poet carries all hefore lum! by
virtue of his poetic gifts which woth lhe alchemy? Verily
there exuts no other alchemy in this world. If there 1s
anything like the clu of Ife? it hes hidden am che ereative
mind of a pact. If there us anything like the sibrs belilt

vith the ebeagan of rmarvelbus meaning amidst socnty He
cnchants secety by his beautiful composition, full of marvelloss


SHAH NAMAH UNDERTAKEN 37

that magic 1s poetry which 15 50 charming. If there 1s
anything ike an unfailing chatm in the world that
charm 1s poetry. Compered to prose, poetry 1s decidedly
more agreeable and fascinauing.

309-30 Agpoct’s work 1slutle appreciated as long
ashe hives. [cis after his death that appreciation comes,
Then hus work 1s considered priceless.

31-38 Verse ts of three kinds—first ghazal! which
deals with romance; second gaside? which means eulogium.
While the former 1s heare-ravishing, che latter 1s soulunspre=
ng. Third 1s megnavi which Tlose with all my heart,
Every distich of a magnevi* must needs have 2 thyme,
Batting magnavt composed skilfully no othet kind of
poetry ean ftmly close the rwo worlds between two letters ¢
Those who claim to be poets make one to thtee matlas
1m one piece of poetry. In ghazal they do not make mote
than one matla* , no scholat will have any doubs about this,
Buc tf there were a hundred thousand masnavis cach one
will have a deligheful matle', By means of masnavi a poet
an conventently praise ings and sweethearts althe,
Furcher, magnavi has become the most popular of all kinds
of poetry beeause its composition 1s an art, possessing at
once the charaetensties of both ghezal and qaiide,

319320 Nigimi rules the domain of magnasi—the
soul-teviving -nasnavi—of which he 1s the pionect and

1 Ghazal 1s an anacreontie poem.

2 Qeiide 1s a poem or ode which may be ealled a longer ghezal,

3. Maynavs sa kind of poetry composed of couplets, each pate
of verses chymes together and agrees in messure

4 Thats, of all kinds of poetry magnavt alone can give a com-
plete picture in the shortest manner aod smallest number of ~ard

38 FUTOHU'SSALATIN

svuator It goes without saying that Nigimi stands fore-
‘most, and second to none, in this art
Good luck to bebold Kbwiye Nizimi* of Gans
(may God sanctify bie tomb!) an a dream |

Shaikh Neramu'ddsn Hlyas commonly known ss Khwaja
Neamt of Ganja was horn sn 1140/535 and died in 1203/600,
A great mystic and epie poet of mediceal Ia he has lee behind
smany woeks, the most important being the KBerise, (1) Makbeans
Aarts (11761572) (0) Kbnaran wa Shin (4180]576) « (ui) Lal
wwe Adsynan (188/584), (19) Sikandar Nereb (191/587). (0)
Heft Pasker (1198/5951 The Rharse (literally quntete) 50
called becmuse 1€ 14 a collecon of there five epte poems which
se Figueatvely descubed as Give teeatutes ( Peny Geny )

The Makbzena dete (treasoreshovte of secrets) cotpunng
feven thousand vers gives many tejgious and ethical manus
The Kbsiran wa Shinn devenbes the lovestory of the Sesanuan
emperor Khun Parvez and Shien, a0 Atmentan princess The
Lals we Mayuwn gives the sory of the infatuation of an Artb poet
(Qus by name about hs swecthestt Lats, both meeting eventually
wth atta fate The Sikender Namab being an epie witb 4
medley of mysueum welizes Alezandet who 1s applauded asa
Prophet aswell asa conqueror buaging into reef bis search for
the foustnn of lfe Ie also pois out the proper place af want
4a governmental organization A wari, according to Nisam,
rt he a philosopher ike the great Anstatle

The Haft Poster (seven efigies) ano called Babrim Nash
soonses of teen stones comprming the explots of Babram Got,
a legendary ng of aacent Iran and related to him by the seven
Princesses wih whom he s supposed to have fallen an love aad
hom he mamed sn succeson These princess came from
India Byzsouum (Rum) Khwanzm, Turkistan (Seglab, Rona
(Ores), Tein and China (Clon) To each of these princeues he
wave acute to lve in Every day he weed to vst ech sod wis
‘ver of the princesses was thts vnted natrated to hia tory

Nizam-—Debrem Nemtab (Teheran, 1357 #2)

+ Grora—a town in the Caucasus snd once the capital of


SHAH NAMAH UNDERTAKEN 39

321-324 One night whieh was like the shab-i qadr*—
cather the ‘Td day—while the stars were shining, each like
the sun, Destiny had flung open to the expectant the gate
of hope and Fate had shown favour to the needy. All
disheartened persons bad obtained new life, and sleep had
vanished from their eyes. The bed of lovers was completely
soaked with tears and the tender sweethearts were enjoying
sound sleep, :

325-327 Ifyou are alover give away your heart and
sacrifice your soul for the sake of love whether realistic or
metaphoric, If you have climbed the ladder step by step
you can climb the temaining steps too. Should you desire
to climb two steps at one time, you would not be able to
climb this ladder safely.

328 You should weigh your soul in the seale of love
so that you may become worthy of being a perfeetlover like
the standard weight of Damaseus.?

the province of Atran in the Mongol empire of Tria—was captured
bythe Turks in A.D, 1588 Later it was recovered by Shih
“Abbis the Great of Trin. Tn the first quarter of the 18th century
ie was teconquered by the Turks tobe annexed to Irinin 1735
by Nadie Shih, Iewas seized by Russia in 1804. Ganja which
was the bietbeplace of Kbwsja Niziwi alto became tbe place of his
burial, His mausoleum whieh sul exists stands some three miles
east of Ganja,

1 Le, the night of revelation wbich is mentioned in the
Quran ( Suea xevii) as ‘tbe mystic night of Power in which
Revelation cowes to a benighted world.’ —A.¥.A, Q, p. 1764.

2 Among the weights that obtained in the Arab empire
vuoder the Umayyads the weight of Damascus—the seat of
Caliphate—mas considered the standard weight to whicb others
conformed,


7° FUTOHU'S.SALATIN

329-331 Gwe up the ealk abour that topic, How far
hhave I deviated? Where Tay the dice on the chess-board
and where hare [lost 1€? Whereto did I deviate from the
Aescripeion of thae might with che resultrhae I lefe narrating
the incident. What a happy night thar was in respect
of beauty, attractiveness and gracefulness! Ie was much
more agreeable than the day of wedlock.

332-333, Every night the sky as looking forward, not
with one bur with a million eyes, expecting chat thar night
sight possibly come bach to purge rime of imputiies.*

334°337, In that night Thad acranged 2 parry ac which
my ptoricated heat was my companion as ell as my.
sgeteclul cupsbearer. My mind was detached from both
the worlds and was rexerating this prayet:

+O God | my sins have exceeded the limit and the
sigh of my supplication has passed beyond the pola star
(fargad). To not know what hand of bred Tam in this
snare that] Ay gleefully in the atmosphere of s10.”

33834 Many a ume I made penanee bur I broke my
penitence at rhe earliest opportunity presenting stelf. No
pledge could Ikeep through. Now I bave become help-
lessar che hands of my wicked self Tam more broken
than my broken promises, Thar part of rhe earth which
15 punishable—all rhe parncles of ts dase ransformed sto
fice being intended as che abode of che guilty an the grave
should be my resring-place when I die,

342 On receiving my sinful clay Gre would suffer
sncreasingly for is sin, af sin can be committed by fire.

a Le evildsys

SHAH NAMAH UNDERTAKEN an

343 So much am I afraid of my misdeeds chat vey
hhope of deliverance has departed from my heatt.

344 If L were asked what could be the remedy L
would make no reply and would simply acknowledge my
faults.

345-348 However, since Faith depends on fear and
hope there is yet hope for me at che ebteshold of the Al-
mighty God}

OGod} Thou ate accepting apologies from all,
high and low (ae all houts)—morning and evening.
Although my sins have gone beyond all computation,
Thy kindnesses ate numerous still. Make my sigh the
extinguisher of sins and let my, soul dominate over my
passion,

349350 In the course of chat night [offered anany-
pryers to God, no one other than Him being awate of my
supplicating mind. Boch of my eyes shed tears of blood
profusely while my tongue was resterating ‘Allah Allahl*

358-359 Thar soululluminating night was half over
but my hearr was still in communion with my eyes. At.
last both the eyes became drowsy, and sleep took me
forcibly into bed. I placed my head hopefully on the pillow.
When I elosed my eyes against black and white I bebeld
ina dream a guesc-house which was brighter than the sun.
Innumerable travellers had come into it and seated them-
selves in every available comer. I walked thtough all parts.
‘of that house and found in it people sieting face to face.
Bur I had no inclination ro tall to anyone even for a mo-
‘ment. After considerable wandering with an intelligent mien
in thar place of refinement I saw an old man scated in
silence, bis countenance showing signs of judgment.

* FUTOHU'SSALATIN

360-361 I approached him and presented my salaam.
Theaed him say coutteously ‘alatkum'-stalim'.* 1 stood

respectfully before him a while, When he said, “Si* I sat
down readily.

362 In ths manner was spent 2 unit of time, and
snexdher from hum not from me did a word pass.

363 Then I enquired respectfully feom that Light of
Dawn (Nizimu) che hidden secrets of creation, s2ytng «

364 ‘Old man], what 1s your name? Who are you?

‘Where do you coms from?”

365-367 When he heaed ehis he smiled and said

*O young man, why ate you making this enquiry
when you know mein fact? Night and day have}
been your associate, Think and look into your mind

i towho 1s your sympathizer and helper amidst all

your worries.”

368.372 As desiced by that old experienced teacher I
thought over the matter. Trecolleeced that apatt ftom the
‘five prayers and the usual meditations I bave had nothing,
1m mind except the Khemss of Nizimi, I had been wonder
tng what that old man of Ganja bad done while he was
-composing the Kkamse, What power of enchantment did
he give eo bis pen that every word chat he wrote he invested
with 2 treasure of magic, Hus expressions became the key
to every science, his heart being the store of seceetse

373 374 No sweet songued person other than hum had
‘been crowned in the domain of composition since the erea-
‘tion of the universe, His verses looked like Laili un bestty
-c0 which the world was deawn like Maynun

1 De. my perce on you

SHAH NAMAH UNDERTAKEN 43

375 When he took the pen to write the Haft Peskar*
be conquered the seven countries like Babe

376-377 He wrote a delightful book entitled Sikandar
Namab in clegant darn? Had Stkandat deeamed of that
boch he would not have hastened towards the water
of life.

378-387 When I understood the hunt and realized the
petsonality I bad been conversing with, 1 proscrated
myself before him; and putting my forehead at hus feet
1 apologized im the most touching words for my inability to
have tecognized him heretofore. He was so generous that
hhe accepted my apelogy and lnfted my head ftom bis feet
and embraced me. He wished me a successful hfe like
humself This made me reyoiee to such an extent that I
was awakened, and immediately as 1 awakened I felt as if
1 was duetowned. But I found myself slone. Neither did
the sitting remain sntact, nor even a companion, My eyes

1 Video 26 footnote t snore

“4 FUTORU'S.SALATIN

shed ceats profusely like a stream of water. Ihave since been
Tonging that that happy scene might be re-staged and chat I
‘ould behold him again in my dream. But alas! this wish of
‘mine has not been tulfiled though I have not given up the
hope, However, since that auspicious night Ihave con
sidered myself a pupil of Nigimi and made the Khemse
the model of my works When I searted composing verses
fon the lines of Nuzitn's poetry, I adopted sn all sincerity
the penename of “Igimi

COMMENTARY

‘IsSimt makes some preliminary observations abour
pPoctty and considers mesnavi—poem io rhymed couplets—
as the best vehicle of y0ff thought and morality. Jalilu'ddia
Rival wrote lus ethical poem of 2,500 couplets in 656/1258
in megnett form which became known as magnevii me'navt
Gpirieval magnet).

Another great megnaui weiter who lived catlier in the
sixth century Hijea (sath century A.D.) and possessed
wider spinttual outlook and experience was Shaikh Nigimu'=
ddin Lyis bin Yusuf commonly known as Kbwaja Nigiat
of Ganja, ‘Ixia developed a special king for him and
borrowed his poetic thought and principles of composition.
He also borrowed from him some technical points, for
instance, (i) shis lament over the wickedness, cexumphsne

5 tim means a petton who owes his fame to bis own merits
and dees not glory in high descent and perental victuen, Kun
“winien wal tun aim (be seldependent aad ake no. pede io
becage) san Arabi saying,


SHAH NAMAH UNDERTAKEN 45

tn bis days’ and (u) this practice of abruptly passing from
themes of religious poctry co those of heroic romanticism.
He also sbared his fate. Like Khwaja Nigim's Mekbzan-1
Asrir wbich was a masterpiece of religious poetry and had
failed to bring tbe desited frurt ‘Isimi's first tno divans
which contained religious poetry wete ruined. When
ywija Nigimi was disappomeed in the results of the
Mekbzens aris be turned from the pursutt of eeligious
poccry and set his mind on wetting the epic which became
Anown as Srkander Namzb. So did ‘Isimi. No longer did
he parsue religious poecy. He thought of writing a
‘Shab Namzb of Hindustin on the lines of the Shab Nameb
of Irin. The eesule was the Futitbu's-Seletin

‘simi beheld Khw3ja Nizimi in 2 vision and hstened
to bis admonition, ‘Then unbued with hs spine he adopted
the pen-name of ‘simi, How far the teem ‘Isimat was
sunable for the genius of the author of the Futibu's
Salim 1s bese answered by 1s 11,693 veees, They
bespeak the man—a lonely person—drowned sn spintual
thought and che pursue of history and hustoriogtaphy.
‘simi, as the word lwerally means was self-dependent,
He was a self-made man, relying always on his own worth
and ments. Again, as the word implies ‘simi was 1. man
of pure cbaracter and possessed a clean soul. He was fully
conscious of his sins and shortcomings for which he was
sincerely repentant, His portrayal of Khwaja Nigimt of
Ganja might be fictitious but the courage and self confidence
that he since acquired cannot be ignored. He was thrown,
into chin-deep waters and had to swim against the current
but he managed to reach the shore safely.

His teumphanr end—hus quiet departure from 1

46 FUTUHU'SSALATIN

country and closing bis life equally quiedy at Meces—
speaks volumes for the genuineness of his heart and
intentions, His Fasiibu's Sele has proved through the ages
as indispensable a link for building a connected and complete
story of Indian history as Khwija Nizimi's Five Treasures
an burlding the bistory of Persian Irerature,

CHAPTER IIL

SHAH NAMAH INTRODUCED
‘SAMI THE NARRATOR OF HISTORY
Verses 388-603

5° TUTOHU'S SALATIN

have no son, Batting you, © Peeucsl Disyosiuen,
Tam attached ro no one. Henceforth, f refuse to
matty and dechne ta set up a rouse, It £ became
intimate with a stave gurl snd indulged in sstafying
my lust, 1 could exert myself 39 nigorously an a abt
thar fimught have to choose a swettlipped one evtty
Vinay go to the marker every month end attach
any heate co another sweetheart f can heep with me
fora month 2 beauniful gut and bring in arother
moon faced one the next month 10 that £ should
not become a family captive and diseased dyeing
tlus yest of farmine and specially am this latest pettod
when banlly anysting other than trouble comes off
the world “fn the courre of nine months a pregnant
woman begets 2 baby who, on becommg tem yeats oll
tums out a devil’,

410-415 When my Poctical Disposition lratd ey
statement, she teplied to me an urn and said: ‘Begee 2
son from me; then you ein go away ftom this county.
fn the bottom of my womb f fave many shells from
cach of which wall be bom many sn offspring. {na
moment f shall beget a thousand of sons, each one mote
tefined and glorious thin the other. Their life will
continue all che Day of Resurrection; each of them
will be baught ke a pestl. Do not euin down m)
ftuggestion on the plea chat Tam bothenng you
Should you turn se doma T would not leave jot,
even then’,

436417 My Heate and { heard the plea of my Poetical
Disposion—the opener of treusures. And { #314, ‘O Heatt,

what is your view? What do you advise me to do in this
matter?”

mont


SHAH NAMAH INTRODUCED, 508 51

418 When the Heart found me tn communion with
the Poeucal Dispostion, he accepted, like myself, the
suggestion of my Poetieal Disposition,

419 421 My Poetical Disposition, my Heatt and I
all vhree—undertooke the work and held asienng an seclusion,
In chis matter, each one made a resolve and all agteed for
better or worse, to the effece that we should acquire a trea
sure of pearls which we might lewe behind in India and
then depret,

422-423 My Heart sad +O man of talents, a world
hhas profited from your compositions, Whrterer you
composed previously has been forgotten, even che text of
your two diwans? has been lost.”

424-427 When my Poeutcal Disposttion beard this, she
sad IE any gold fs been lost, Tam the elixir. If a poem
thas been lost Iam alive. Do not worty about peaels when
you possess the sea, Go into seclusion, make pleasant
atrangements and call a heartentereaining companion who
would attend to you evety morning and evening, and all
your requirements will be mer by bim *

428 429 | My Heart and I stopped conversing: night
and day, we wandered making a ssarch so. that we might

find a suitable companion to the Wking of out amuble
Poetical Disposition,

Speaking of the beautsfat attributes of
Qaet Babin’ din bib 1 qusse?
430-432 Alas! In che course of his yeat, betefe of
generosity, I have nor seen even one pure man who might
1A droan 1s 4 collection of poems
2 Le Supeciaendene of peacoat twas his duty to recewe
petions from the aggneved an present chem to the king

52 FUTUHU’S SALATIN

sit hy the men of gentus for 2 while and solace a lacerated
heart saying ‘What progress have you made in tbis
matter? What ts your object an this seeking?”

433434 Maman of alent ides nmself for mote
than 2 year like a treasure im a secluded corner, no hod)
well enquee shour him saying “How ate you? Why ate
you seated 19 2 cotner??

435439. In such an age my Poetical Disposition hepe
me looking for a gen-rous man I strained my eye of hope
sn erery ditection and scrutinized everyone, black and white,
wondering whence fortune might come and open to me the
dor of happiness and from whuch side che breeze of joy
might blow 1 was curious to Know from which sbell the
peatl of grace might spring 1 wondered who would inttor
duce me to a liberal man and who would inspire me with
poetry in the coutse of the night.

440 444 S continued brooding over ehisy when, after
month ot two, thete arrived a couner in good cheer at my
door eatly in the morning. He wished me well, and uttered
Inigh rounding praises I said to bum

‘From where ate you coming? You srem to be soul
nounshing and consoling” He ceplied, 1 ain our
awakened fortune Be happy becaus~ hereafter 1 shall
be your companion Under the Grman of the prudent

gaze bave come r0 you O worthy man!”

4457449. Tsatd, “Tell me che name of that gezt,
rcheve me of my worries?

He answered, “That man of sharp wits 1s known
a1 BabiulHagq, he as the tongue, the heart, che
yes and eats—every ach slerr and wire Hit
forehead 1s sbuning Ike dhe avoon and bis mind 13 at
bight ax the sun His poctey as well as his prose 1

SHAH NAMAH UNDERTAKEN 3

delightful. He artends on falars always and devotes
Inumself all che time to telteving the distressed.”
450-451 When I beatd the q7ei's atebutes from

that lucky courier, my Heare became restless, At unce, I

expressed a wish to be able to kiss his foot.

452-454 Then that lucky counter took me direct to
lus rendence. I arrived there full of hope, there was
neither a durbin at Ins residence, nor 9 curtain-bearer, I
advanced tnto the interior and met him without formality.
it was an amenity, highly befirung the door of a generous
man,

455-457 When the beral good gézr saw me, he
advanced a few steps to show me respect. He enchanted
me by his cheery looks, Fam unable 0 say how much L
was obliged co kim. He took me by the hand and
weleomed me am assigned me the honour of a seat.

458.461 When we sat facing each other, we talked
over the present and the past. Through his conversation
ty soul revived, my spring-eain obtained the wind of
pleasure, When my Poeue Disposition found such an
associate of astheuc sense as she had been looking for, I
said to her, ‘Now 1s the time for you to produce all the
tweasures of skill that you possess. Make your cloud of
pearls rain’.

462-463 Most delightfully I cited many verses of my
composition before that man of arts. And when I found
4 good favourable tesponse from him, I narrated to him my
story.

464-466 He said ‘Such a sweee-voiced nightingale

4s fie for the orchard of paradise. Te as a pity that such a

bird should have continued neglected in this gatden and

st FUTOHUS-SALATIN

such a parrot should have remained a eaptve 1
Hindustinl There 1s no eulip-bed hefiing such a
rightingale except the hing’s court.”

467-468 Then, he took me to the hing’s duthaz, Ie
looked as if he conducted me from a darh night t0 the
moon. May God compensate him for this service.l May
the heart of his hing he the promoter of good !

Restersuon of tanbid inclading an eccount of the encient
ings, buefly mentioned 1m ell she books

469-474 God the guet of kingdoms and hestoner
of crowns—source of light for the star of kings—raises one
from the dust to the sky and throns another from the
height of glory into an abyss, He furnuhes us with a
hhundred bounnes. When we ste ungrateful He infec:
2 famine, If we revole cucning away froot His devotion,
He snsals 2 gyrane as king. When we concentrate 00
devonan to Him, He gives the world around us an age of
Prospenty, installing such a euler as aught provide the
‘Sounded with an antidose and a proper treatment

4757476 When that Holy God intended to reveal His
Godbood, He first brought mato exntence Adm. But
the object of Adams creanon was Muhammad Ling of
both the worlds,

477-479 And from Adam came into the notld
KayGmarg® who establuhed the insntution of monarchy.

x Thus us conftmed in the Afar
(Par, 1861) val. p55
& According to the Shab Namah of Firdaus Kaytmarg wat

the Gest monarch ia wotld's history—the “Est of Adam's offp1ing
who ever exercised regal suthorty’—the fist hing of the Peshdie

kab of Mardi


SHAH NAMAH INTRODUCED 35

Then God brought Tahmias' and subsequently Hoshang,
ott of whom fought with a dragon. He gave to Jim?
the retns of the world, and through brm the machinery of
the world state attained perfection,

480.501 When He wants co shed the blood of earthly
bangs He gives the country of Jim to the Zabhakites.
When He gwes relief to the eartlly beings Faredin®
tortures Zahhak* to death, He grves the dominton of Trin
to Teas whose blood ts shed out of enmity by Tar and
Salam. Then He geants success co Manuchthr,§ who

dian dynasty. Cj, Macan, T=Sbib Namah of Firdaus, vol, J,
pu

1 Tehmirsy was the thind kang of the Peshdidiin dynasty,
He u said to have reigned thiecy years and 1s supposed to have
founded Babylon, Nineveh and Isfahin, Aecoriiog to Pesan
mythology he tntcoduced the custom of domestieating anummals and
hurds and enjoyed the ule of Deoband (eapturer of demon),
Op, et. pp 1607

2 Jim stands for Jamshed, a Persian king, who 1s stated to have
resgned seven hundred years and ts believed to have tntroduced
weapons of war and miliary act Op.eit, p «8

3 Fanidun us sad to have rergned an Iria for five hundted years,
While he fought successfully with Zahhak and hilled him he
betrayed great weskness for his youngest son Tray When Tey ws
‘assassinated at che hands of bis enue brothers Tir and Salam there
began the unending blood feud hetween Tein and Turia which
supplied Firdauss with matenual for his Shab Namab. Op. ext pp
56-66, Also sec Vachha, P. B—Firdau and Sbib Namah
ombay 1959) p 140.

4. Zathak (onde p15 spra) ss denounced as a monster and as
an oppressor of Tein He 1s also depicted as an antagonist of God and
‘man, from whose hands Fatudun saved lein, Op. crt. pp. 38-46

5 Manichube was the son of Ira and seveoth king of the
Peshdsdian dynasty of Ira

56 FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

octutes Tir and Salam to death, Thea He gwes the
‘Kingdom co Kaiqubid! and later destroys his crawn and
throne, After that He bestows dominion on Zav* and
makes him a new king tn hfe land of Tin, Then after
some time He instals Naudhat® on che throne. Later He
gives che standard! co Ka'ts* of the Golden Shoe

4 Kanqubad was founder of the Katysntan dynasty of Iria 208
1 snd to have eeigaed for one hundred and twenty yest
SN, W, (Csleurts, 1883.) pp. 95.287

2 Zav (Uterlly 461) was the name of a son of Tahmisp. Ops
ct pe 383

4g Naugbsr fought several bards with the Turantaa AtrinySb
=the mortal enemy of ean—and was Snally defeated and
hulled Macsn, T—Sbs5 Nameb (Persian text) volo 1s pp= 185-99

4 The Kivam scindard celers to a blacksmith named Aisa,
smo of whore sons were killed by ZabbIR, Subsequently the later
wanted to devour eves, the third soo. When Zahhik’s men eam
to take this tied soa, Kivah fired the leatber-cover of hus body ©
suck and raed exci. On hesniag the nove be people who
were sleady prejudiced agaait Zabhah mustered strong under the
fhaoner of Farin, a desceadsot of Jarsbed, ‘Then they made an
serach upon Zakhie who was defested and. thromn into a prson
where he die

“The Kiva standsrd was looked wpon nace then as an ausple
‘cous national fag. It was beaunGed snd bejenelied by Fandia
whose succeiots on the throne of Lida meressed the beauty of the
standard by omamennog it, Duong the raga of Yazdprd, the
Iau king ofthe Sevan, that standsed fellanta the bands of the
‘Arabs who core 1100 pees,

5 While Kagubid ly m bu desth-bed he nominated Kale
KaG, the eldest of bis four sons, as hus saccemor. According to tbe
‘Shab Namab (Op. ast, pp. 29-30) Ki'as was the s2me man a5
KaikiGs, I two vette (3490 snd 10,107) ‘sims mentoas

Kavkdfus suggesting that Kaiki'as son of SiySwakbsh was 2 sepseate


SHAH NAMAH INTRODUCED 57

and afteewatds makes che star of Kakbusrau* shine; and
causes Aftisyab co be killed by hts sword. Then He
takes him into a cave and bestows the Kaviini throne on
Lubrisp? Then He gives ygyGusbtisp? che crown and
takes him victortous for sometime. From Gusheisp, then,
He passes the kingdom of Tein to Isfandyie4 and makes che
country stable under lum. After that, He grants a long
reign to Babman so that he mgt conquer the world.
Later He gives the country to Humay, daughter of Bahman,
the foreress conqueror, Then He gives the wotld state t0
Dirib* and entrusts bum with the crown and throne of
kings. From the loins of Darib He brings forth a man
to whom He gwes the dominion of the world and the

1 After a reign of one bundted and fifty yests Kaiki'us left
‘he throne for his geandson Kaikhusau (Cyrus) He united an his
veins ‘the iteconclable bloods of Kaigub§d and Afrisyab',

2 Labrasp was the father of GushtSsp,

3, Gusheisp also called Gueshisp cojeyed 2 reputation hike
‘askdvsrau and ts remembered for bis snotdinate ambition With his
Aeath began the dechne of the Karyanian dynatty and fas successors
to the throne of Ida proved exxremely mneffcent

4 Isfandyar wat a son of Gosheisp, He 1 noted for his
tiranie combat with Rustam who blinded lum by means of an

5 Keeping pace with Fiedaun's style and ancorptsating hus
‘expressions and thoughts ‘Isami uses the words j2bin and ‘clam an
the sense of a world state

6 Dati was the son of Homay who transferred the crown to
huovim her fetime He ascended the throne 1m 424 BC Then
hhe invaded Greece and captured a daughter of Philp, tbe Greek
fang He kept her for one night and seat back Ie is ssid. that
she subsequently gave birth to Alerandec.

8 FUTOHU'SSALATIN

name of Dari! He causes his murder at the hands of
bis own army. Two officers roll bis head ante the dust.
Then He adorns the world hike a bride under Alexander
the Fortunate? son of Rip. He makes tuo ruler
of black and whue and makes hus dagger bright like the
sun, He bangs the world under his rule and anfuses
a new spint inthe worl during his reign. He makes
Im king over sea and land; before him stand kings
smith gieded loins. At last He rolls his head into che dust
and throws his beloved body into a grave.

Account of the commencement of tyratny
an the country of Trin and the Unterregnism

seag09 When Alexander passed away {rom this world,
the world ‘rolled up the eatpet of allegiance. Everywhere
‘man struggled for supremacy; one submitted not to anthers
Evecyone seized a place by means of the sword and made
‘a name by fair means or foul. Tn every capital there was 2
crowned king who sat on the throne—Csesar in Rome,
and Khigin in Chuna. Every ruler secured 2 counteys

1 Dita, son of Dirt, ascended the throne 1m 336BC, He
was defeated by Alexander 1 the bate of Abele in 33t B.C. 2nd
fled towards Bacta where he was killed, In 330 BC. Alexander
became lang of ts,

2 Alexander wat the son of Disab and grandson of Philp
according tothe ana legend. He sud tohave Leen kiog of
the West as well as ofthe Ear and empecer of Greece and lesa ¢
snd us conquests so mnluded pats of western Ass, Egypt,
(Cental Ana and some trntones of whit snow elled Afghenistan
and the Pam. He lived from BSG 396 ro 343 and 1 supposed to
have been a men of Fath A,Y¥,A'Q. p.760,


SHAH NAMAH INTRODUCED 59

Yazdayed! and Babrim Gor,? cach, took a principality by
force, Hurmuz,? Parweat and Shiriya’ also raised a royal
sandard everywhere, Babrim Chobin’ and Nishirwin"
each took the world by farce.

520-525 But in the Shab Namab hardly do see

1 Yardsprd was the geandion of Nushitwin He was the
last king of pre-tslamue Iria , and, on beng defeated by the Arabs
sm the hate of Nahivaod he Aled towards Turkestan and d-
speared

 Bahrim Got was a king of the Sassanian dynasty, During
sus reign Trin enjoyed great prospenty and presented 1m the words
of Firduas ‘a picture of pleasute and plenty’. $ N. V. ps 200.

3 Hurmuz was the name of a minster of Babrim Gor, It
‘was slo the name of 2 son of Nushswan,

4 Parvez was an feaman chief mentioned by Fidaun $,F,
Weve v4 p 394

15 Shuruya was 2 son of Bizhaa Op, et. vol av, p» 300.

© Bahri Chohin was a wartioe an the service of Hurmuz,
He was the son of Gushtisp and the marchlotd of Ray. He was
so called on account of his lankiness, Op. cit. vol, vit, PPs 7-73»

7 Nushiewan (531-579 A.D.) was the twentieth kang of the
‘Sassantan dynasty, noted for his yustce and prosperty. He sent
his talented miuster Barzaway on a mussion to Indis, ehargiog bie
10 study Hindu character and folklore and collect some distinctive
ancedotes Barzaway picked up here threads of an ideal story
which, takeo to Iran, was eastan Pablavs mould and produced in
the form of a hook entitled Kalle Dimne (Jackal and Fox) with
illustrations from the ammal Kingdom of Inha During this
period the game of chess namely sbatrany (Sanskut waar ) Was
sntroduced an Tran,

Teas sad that the empue of Nushuewia ancluded the whole of
‘Transoxana, speading beyond the Oxus and the Indus 1m the east
and to Egypt, Syria and Arabua in the west, He also held mastery
over the Meduereanian regions and wat the lord of Grecee,
Prophet Muhammad was horn doring bis reign 1n 570 AD.


60 FUTOHU S-SALATIN

recotded any kings other than chose of Tein, In Titia a
group of che Turks and in Tein a group of the Mag!
beeame powerful, The decertful world unforeunately eceated
hosedines beeween these two people. Had there been no
Oxus between the two, there would have been frequent
bloodshed between them, For the sake of acquiring the
material world, they shed much blood but finally brought
about thete own helplessness by thts very tycanny,

516517 From the loins of Faridiin speang ewo® sons
between whom Fate created a steange enmity.!

Although 11s long since they paused away, yet chat
‘sumury 1s alive, even to day, among there descendants ¢

Beginning of the propbetbood of the last of the

Prophets—Mubemmad Peace on bim and bus descen

dants and companions 1 May God be pleased with all

of them |

588-520 With the advent of Ahmad, religion became
‘exalted, and he espeured the whole world without an armys
An army of angels rallied co him, and believers in ebe unity
of God attatned success everywhere,

+ Le, Mays or Gceoworsuppers and followers of Zerester

2 Fanulun bad chice sons—Tur, Sslun and Tray He dived
tus Sate among then thteeSN.W. vol tsp it

3 Thu ts a reference to the biter enmity eheough the ages
between the Irntns and Tutanians ot Turks,

4 Tsar reminds us of the war that ws staged in Ficdaun’s
‘Soab Namab between Tut and Tray Tur who bad received. ay hit
Paternal abentance Titan and Chua became eslous of Isp the
later bavng received ean as us share Subsequently Toe hiled
Tex) | Msouclibr, som of Tey, took revenge, andthe wat this
tndled continued among thei devezdants

SHAH NAMAH INTRODUCED 6

521 The Prophet struck counst unerringly an the name
‘of Truth, and he cleaned the world's face of the dirt of
snfideity.

522 The world was overspread wirh lus flags of Truth
and he took the right path and took st frely.

523-524 A world of people became his enemies but
in no way could they ampar his cause, Even when the
(lace) empires will disappear from the world, bis Sharia?
wll remain.

525-526 After lum came AbG Bakr, ‘Umar and
“Usmin and ‘Alt successively.

They did not deviate from the path of justice and
equity, all maineained the Shariat of Ahmad,

527-528 Afterwards many troubles broke out in the
world and many were rolled in the dust through tyranny.
The deceieful world indulged in wickedness, ruining every
dynasty.

529532 Many a king became the target of its
arrows and many natrow munded people {ell captive to ite
Fury of the Fare does not afer that person who has freed

1 Le the Prophet established the Faith femly
2 For the mesning of Shantat see the Tughlag Dynaity, p 358
Ioornote In conneccon wsth ‘Isamn's remark that ‘the Shatta* will
remain’ at should be noted that over seven hundred years ao
Khwaja Niearms nociced that considerable alterations had bern made
tm the body of the Sherrat He says addressing the Pro. ber’
Basks barco bastavand bargo sir
Gar tu bebuns ma sbundsbub bie
(0 Prophet your Sbartat has been altered to su-h an extent
shat i you see wt now, you would not recognize 1 yourself )
(Nuam of Gasp)

6 FUTOHU'S SALATIN

thumself from the erammels of the world, When many 2
crowned head was tolled im the dase in this treacherous
world, Fate settled the caliphate on the Abbasids according
10 a saying? of the Propher,

533 534 When eahphate devolved on Hattin,? the world
came back under the rule of low After Histin had passed

1 There it no authentic bedi of this hind But to understand
‘the muse w should be noted that Prophet Muhsmmad 1s said to
have anformed bis uncle “Abbas bin Abdal Murrah that Bbiafat
would pass at later stage nto hus house (Tabast—Terikh ! Umea
wal Muluk, Csico vol ve p 123) Thus unlthe the Umayyads
the Abbsuds were rnvested with a halo of prety,

4 Harun a1 Rashid comamoaly known av Harun Reshid wat
the Gth and most celebrated of the they seven Abband caliphs of
Baghdad He ceigned as well as ruled bike on absolute king. over a
vat empue smetchiog from East to West for tnenty.thece yest
(8701786193188) He was the embodiment ofall that ws best
‘tm medieval Arab history He took great interest in art and etenee
and bis bnthant court was a centre for all the branches of scholit=
ship He ordered that an evety moique must be establubed a
sebeol for the study and colavatin of diferent sciences, and
besues, furashed with thousinds of books wee ebronn open tO
all the scholars urespeetive of religion throughout the Islamte wed
He sent forthe Greek, Jemsb, Chnsnan aud Hindu scholsts and
cogrged the best of them as eansators in coure service Thos
‘ere prepared under bus patronage Arabic translatons of all the
teat books of the world He wat also anzious eo enligbtea his
seal by acquming on the one hand the quiatessence of buman
thought and. plilosephy and on the other hand by sequaianns
tumself mth the mucnes of baman life He wied to go on foot
from Baghdad to Mecea—a dutance af about 1,000 miles—t0
Perform the Hay and alto ased to go about incognito. inthe
sweets of Baghdad in order to sredy the conditon of the pootst
sweats of bu subjects He was rcipwous but not fanatics

Harun Reshl also earned great fame ua the domain of legend

SHAH NAMAH INTRODUCED 6

aay many 1man af insight sprang from among bis descen-
dants,

A bnef account of the Turks" seizmg the country
of Tran and establusbing connection wih the caliphate,

and taditoa He has become well known for the Arabran Nughts
(Alf Laila) a the Arabian collection of fary tales called Tt was
built on matenat bortowed from Tran and India, the Indian maternal
foroung particaaely the bans of the famous Kahle Dimne (Jackal
and Fox) According to Masudi the Arab histortan of third
century (tenth century AD), the material for the tales of df Lele
‘was impotted from Tran and India during the teign of al-Mansur
fecond Abband caliph, thirty years before the time of Harun
Rashid Particularly noticable init are afew stoncs sbout the
latter Te as said chat these stoues were added subsequently by
‘Abu Muwas, 2 court poet of Hatun Rashid

Harun Rashid died on 3rd Jumseds Il, 193/ 24th Match, 809

1 Tush (Teork of Persian lencons) 1s 2 word of obscure ongin
and 1s supposed to mean strength, might and power According.
to the Chinese sources st 1s the name of a nomad tnibe who were
descendants of the Huns and were akin to snd even sdentesl with
the Mongols (E T,1V,p 900) From Muslim (Arab and Persian)
sourees st appears that Turk (Toork) was the name of Yafe
(Gsphat) son of Nosb, snd he became the ancestor of all the peoples
inhabiting the atea from the Choa Sea to the remotest West, eg
the Turks, Khozas Slavontons, Russisas Tuskomans and Chinese
Fin m descent from Tuck stands Alanja, who had twin sons,
‘Tartar and Mughot between whom his dominions were divided
From the latter are descended the Mughul tnbes, and from the
formet the different Toorks tubes (TF) Thus both Tartars
and Mughals are believed to bave descended from the lors of Turk,
son of Noah,

‘The European scholars consuler ‘Tusk’ ss vdentecal_ with ‘Tattar™
which name they consder as gererie embracing tlxee different
‘ecet—{a) the Manchus in the esst of Asia, north of China, (b) the,


64 FUTOHUS SALATIN

ith 4 sketch of Suljen Mabmad bin Subukugin May
God sllunsine these evsdence!
Mongols or Mughals whe occupy chiefly the cddle porton
north of Tibet and (2) the Tucks whose habitat extended fcom the
desert of Gobi tothe Velgs and from the Caspian fr into Sibert

“The beathen Turk continved long to invade the Mush desu
sons of central Anta uatl 291/904 when their powerful invasion
‘on Samargand was driven back Afterwards they embraced [ln
and eighty eight years later (382/992) when they entered Sara
aod aod subsequently Bukhara they did so un the garb of Mursl-
sans Tessand that by ged exntary Hhyea (soth century A D)
the Turkub tubes (200 000 tenti) adopted Ilam as ther religion
of Ghee own accord (E 1, IV p 900) And eatly sm soth
cxntuty Hhjea(x6t century) all the regions stretching from the
Balkan peninsula and the Black Sea to the Chanese fronmte e1me
sender the sway of the Turks

Te mus be noted bat unlike che Arabimmbabitants of Araba
and descendants of Abraham and Kahtan—these Turks bad
cenbraced lam mainly with the object of sauafying thew ambtcn
Yor workly power snd indulgence im war From thet fold erse
sloostall the Indo Musi hutortans from Minha} to Kbaft hbsa
swdluding Isa All of chem unlzed Ilan ia the domain of
Ihutociograpby by depienng every move of their hero Kings mn the
light oftheir marrow conception of Ila Says the Mebauinal
ler

The rehgion of Tam after having been Arab, and after
having stabraved the Greek sciences fell into the hands of the
‘orks Taras and Mongols who descended upoa Islamic eounties
for wereenary guin and seized the power And if they abo
adopted the religion of the vanguuhed people, they only putt
on like a coat without undertanding stsroner spirit as cher minds
serene prepared fot ve, they were not ft ro receive st These
barbarians ted to benumb the spint of their subjects by exon
sushing the Tove of scence an order ta domate chem bett
‘The di s0 further, with the object of assuming to themelves alone


SHAH N&\MAH INTRODUCED 65

535.537 Although the Tasks made another? raid during
the Abband rule yet ches, one and all, rook sheleer in Islimm
nme. Far from revolting against che Abbands
hey recened the msgnia of ropaln fram the Abbasd
caliphate

after sot

sed menopolizing tae power to adjudiate all the afiues of the
Martens And thes exploned the afea of diine pre destiatin,
culinag r folly ra order to prevent tne thought of their subjects
fiom working and ther will from asseraag self with desermina~
con, They did to furthermore sm ofder fo spread the idea that che
doo sof dino favour wete henceforth cloted to new-comers to
fBefold of slam Ia shor, so much were the thisking faculnes
ofthar sobjects berumbed by the sad bubsnans thar the latter
vere content to follow the stereotyped and unchangeable wens of
ther predecenots Te wis they, in a word sho folnfed the
charsere of the religion which they had embriced snd followed
sausexternal meet hut which they bad neither understood nor
sed to andersand in ut inne spit?

Vaghen, LL V—Mabssi'-Llam, Yols, 1353 Hira p73.
uanslated from feslan Apologia dell temusmo

1 Thus sa cefereoce to the Terho-Arab suuggle which st
urseeable from the second century Hyea (eighth eentary A.D)
The Turks feequeadly yraded the Arch empire hut were almost
always dren hack There was alvo stesdy conversion amongst
them, and the height of conversion was reached an the eighth
erntury Hyea (fourteenth century AD) when the Mongol ot
Tarko Mongol Iuoglom of the Gollea Horde was completely
slemiased Subsequently the Ozbegs (the Turks of Teansoxsns)
snd Noghas (the Turks of the Velgs area) who were really descend
ants of Joy, the eldest son of Chingiz Khan and last ofall the
Caghatas—descendants of Chingy Khan's second soa who bad
cvablshed a kiogdom spreading from Keshghar to the Chinese
fronuer—oined the fold of lam (Barthel! —Turkesten down
fo the Mongol savauon, pp 186-187 London, 1928 and E1
vol tv, P gos)

5

66 FUTOHU'SSALATIN

1538-539 Through dine guidance and by the help of
fortune, che warttor Turks succeeded in etushing their
adversaties, Those among them, who rose to kingship,
adorned the world by their generosity and munificence.

540.541 One from among the house of Turks atramned
such a distmetion that God bestowed on him the dominion
of the material and spititual worlds. He wore the dervish
cap beneath the crown and was clad in coarse cloth, covered
with soft silk.

542. Apparently he was devoted to Ayics yet in fact
he was feee feom physteal love.*

'543°549 Even af any king before him had_marched on
Hindustan he eetteated alter raiding this beautiful Land and
made peace, either in exchange for clephants of for the hand
of a beauuful gir? No one set his heart on settling an this
meadow, none eapcured even a fortress, mor won 2 sieges
Noone demolished the adol-house of Somaith and none
made the blood of enemies flow like the Euphrates. None
setcled in this land and no one eared to reside an this eapti-
vaung garden. No one uprooted the Hindi power and
‘one demolished the old sdal houses.

35° But lus ttoops overran the couney in such a
‘manner that the Hindu power was destroyed completely.

551 Solong as che world lasts, will last also the
memory of Mahmid’s glory.

552-558 Ifyou and 1, Oman of intellect, have 2
hholding 1n this country and ate in a position to replace the

¥ See verses 808-810 and the eorrespondiug, footnote, snfre
2 Hee us the scme of poewesl Routh ‘There not 2
sheed of hstoneal evidence behind ‘Tsaea’s amagination

SHAH NAMAH INTRODUCED 6

dol houses by mosques and sometimes forcibly to break the
Brahmanic thtead and enslave women and childten*—all chis
as due to the glory of Mahmid. This 1s surely the fact of
the matter, the tese 1s empty talk, If we do not pay
thanks ro hum to-day, to morrow we would suffer on account
of our ingratitude, All the deeds that he petfotmed in thus
country yesterdsy, have become, one and all, a story to-day.
The achievements that you make to-day will also become a
story ro-motrow.

559 Thave many stories in my head, to thus tune I
have many a song to sing.

560 Should no one gwe me a heating, to whom
would I then natate these stoues? Tell me I cannot
but nartare them to my own antoxicated Heatt.

561-562 As long as there isa sign of life in me, T
shall keep company with that person who 1s my friend and
my cupbeatet. Afflicated by longing for a soul-nourshing
beloved one, my night has eumed black and long like her
curls

563 564 Come,O cup bearer tonight you are mj
companion for you would listen eagerly to my story. I
natrate this story and you listen to tt eagerly. Keep wa
until the hout of rejoicing arrives.

A bref and summery account of the bings of
Hindustin

cl FUTOHU'SSALATIN

of the same am this book. Then say who was the fest
fof the powerful kings to have come to India from Ghazni,
guided by Providence and to the hking of well-wishers.
569°594 In dhs sdolateous country, who was the
first to lave introduced Iskim?? Who wielded the Indian
swotd in India transforming tbis land snto a garden? In
whose name was the kbuths first read? Who was the
first to strike cosns, stamping the sight royal seal? Who
conquered these formidable forttesses? By whose sword
did the extth's surface become ted? Who crossed the
ver Indus like a wind and who fit up the flames of wat
ma India? Who carried his rads to Multin (Mocltin)
and Libor (Lebaver), catsing high the banner of Istim?
Who uprooted che sdol-house of Gujacie?? Who took
Pithora prisoner? Who disturbed the Hindi enber? Who
pamanly captured Budida?# Who was che first to

5 See commentary

2 Thissa reference to the famous Somantth invasion,

3. Mizru'ddia Muhammad of Ghor fought wo svecesve
battles with Rie Pithora or Prkaye, the Chauhan leader who was
also the suler of Debi end Ayer, at Tartin (Thineswer) in 587/
1491 and 588/192, In the fist battle Matsu'ddin was defeated
sod wounded, But n the scoond bate he triumphed, Rie Preboca
fed and was taken pasoner and killed. Govinda the Tomsara cue,
who was a vassal of Prthviaja, was slsin in the engagement
TNR, L pp 468459.

4 Badin st sad to have been invaded by Salis Masud Gis:
about the yere 4t9/to28, Bot HundS ule over Badan remaned
rotact, and n 1175 AD. Raja paypal built there the temple of
Nilkanth Mabadeo, Raye Apypal was succeeded on hus death
{AD 3196) by Dhacampal who war tolled an a bale with
Qorbu'ddin Abak im so4fss97. Quibuddia Atbak bun thee a
school which he named Miviess Madrasa after his master

SHAH NAMAH INTRODUCED 69

become a wise and yust hing in chat city?! Who killed
Ja Chand in Chandriwal?? Who brought other chicfeatas
to the rack? During whose reign did the Debif of ancient
days become a great eapteal?? Then who led the troops
from Dehli and shed blood as far as che Red Sea?¢ Who
conquered Mandalgath® and Ranchambhor?® And after
wards in whore hands came the seeptre?. Who brandished
the sword like the waves of the Ganges and marched his
troops up to Kanayy cumuleuously? Who captured
Lahhanuti and Bihir? Whom did Destiny give such
‘great strength? Who captured Minikpiie and Koro??
Who inflicted complete defeats upon the Hindus? Who
overtan Oudh (Awadb) along with Tithut? Who ratsed
the sandied of viewory? Who conquered Jalor and

Murzzddio And be lefe xe under the care of Ieutmish whom
he appornced governor of Budaun

1 Hostaush was governor of Budaua, no king

2 Mutzzuddia Muhammad Ghorl defested Jat Chand the
Rathor raja of Kanayy 10 the battle of Chandeawsl 10 §91/1294
Jat Chand was killed CP KD, p a8

3 Thatss,dutiag the reign of Mrutmub and subsequently
under Balbo See the Sanskrit insenption describing tbe glory of
Debli—aa eyeewitness account Husain, AM —Tughlug Dynasty,
P43

4 The Red Sea (drys galewm) stands for the Ganges aod
wes erbutares, and the verse contains a reference c the conquest
of Bengal by Tknyaru ddsa bua Bokheyar hha,

5,6 Mandalgscb (identifiable wth Mandu in Malwa) end
Ranthomabhor (near Jarpur) were twa strong military fortresses and
tiocipalicies which were Gally annexed to the empite of Debit
wader ‘Alauddin Khali Mlrurmh too had captured these Cj,
FS 1, verses 2308-2315

7 ‘These verses are runed ta the she of *Alau’ddin
wd, ary glory of *Alaw'dd

Ed FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

Siwina?? Who routed the Hinda clans? Who held che
‘banners of Islim high, mmpatting light in Chitsor, Mand
and Gwalior (Keliir)? Who was the ftst co puch
camp at Deogit? Who seized Telingina by physical force?
Who washed tis sword a the waters of the sea? Who
stuck his sunbke sword everywhere? Through whose
lustrous sword were the fortress gates thrown open? Who
rematned a byword of goodness in this country? Who
adminustered real justice in the truest sense of the word?!
Who in this world did not hesirate in giving away every-
thing out of generosity?*

595-598 Who remamed dead drunk as Jong at be
Yived?® “Who was alert and remained vigilant chroughout
Ins eign?® Whom did Destiny strike with sword through
inadvertence?! Whom did setze unawares in the field of
battle?

597. Should sordid ames give me an opportunicy 1
‘would bring ont each of thése points from the treasury of
my memory.

1 Same at forete 7 of page 69.

2 Mander was strong fert nd town ia Rajputana, Is root
ste sll tacable inthe area of the erstwhile of Jodhpur Sest-
Ue was conquered by Mess from Rae Wittipala ofthe (Params)
Rojpur house, Cf. ET.E A. Pe a3.

3. Either Memish or “Alon Nai, But every song
Muslim ruler considered the adainiteation of juices bis Gt
dry, Bren Reniya duds, Hawerec, the vers 2318 sod 2319
suggest tae Heatmish copped the lt.

Possibly Sulkin Nifiu'ddin Mabe, son of Mrotih
Posibly Morinesddin Kaigabad,
‘Shiylnaain Batten,
Jalen Khai,
Prince Mubsmmsd the May.


SHAH NAMAH INTRODUCED faa

598 Hearken ! O wise seeker of history, hear for
a moment the story of the natrator of history.

599°603 In my head, thete 1s 2 strange idea which
gerkies me morning, evening, day and might, Its his.
T wish I wete able to narrate to mtelligent men the stories
of kings, But Iam so completely overwhelmed by the
clouds of sorrows that I caneor even brenthe freely. Comey
© cup-bearet, pour for me in che jar thae foaming wine
which might remove the bad effect of drink. Give me that
wine which might enable me through captutes to break
the sleepmg-sickness and to strike a stone at the glass of
sottows.

COMMENTARY

‘isimt considers Sulkin Mahmid of Ghazni as a
nissionaty of Isim, Perhaps the Suljan had the missionary
spirit m him but the tumes being unfavourable for the kind
of mussionaty work, namely the peaceful spread of Islim,
‘lsdmnt’s veference (verse 569) 1s absolutely incorrect, Sslim
hhad come ito India much before the me of the Turks
who may be credited with establishing Islame power but
not Islim.

In fact, the Atabs had held India sn high regard from
the beginning, and ie was much before the burth of the
Propher of Isiim that they had established contacts and
commercial relations with India, Decidedly it was the Arab
merchants who gave to her western coast the name of Malé
or Mais or Malabar, Thi coast had been known
heretofore as Kerala or Kerllam, 1, e. the country of Kerala,
the indigenous name wbich-has been revived now by the

n FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

Congress Government. Milibas comprises two nords—mali,
«2 Deavidian term for hill and bar based on the Arabie barr
meaning a country, Later the Arab merchants who came
there in search of pepper and spices weote Mala or Mala
or Malabar differently. Some wrote ar as Malibar;_ some
4s Molibir and oebers Malaybic

‘The eastern cosst of India which at one time went by
the name of Pennunknonda or Cholamedalam was named
Miabse by the Atabs®,

Saylin—meaning a star upon a horse's face ot spreading
from the forehezd to the nose—ss the Arabic name for
Ceylon, s0 called because of us peculiar shape®,

That Lim came neo India through the Arabs and
that the Tndo-Arsb contact began as early as the fall of
‘Adam from patedise s evident from the sifiir and bad
Iwersture, Jslilu’ddin Suyuti* says:

‘Ton Jursir and Hskam have narrated on the
suchoriry of Ibn Abbas char the first place on which
God mate Adsm fall was the land of India, And ie 1s
narrated by Ibn ‘Abbis that the Fall of Adam took
place on the land called Dayna, namely India.

And Hazrat *Alt abn Abi Talib stated shat the
best fragrance on the face of the earth is that from the
land of India whetem was arranged the Fall of Adam.
‘This (Indian) fragrance emanated from a wee of
paradise.’

Wn Batties—Tbe Rebla (G.0.5) p, 381
Hsin, A. M-—Tughlng Dynan, Appendix C
Ibn Baxags—The Reba (G, . S.), p, 168

Suyasi,Jalte'Sdio—Darr’ Larch, Cae. so,

Bo 55

SHAH NAMAH INTRODUCED 3

*And Iba S'ad and thn ¢Asihar narrated on the
autbortty of Iba ‘Abbis tha God ordained the Fall
of Adam on the soil of India?”

And che Sabbstu'l Merjin Fi Asie 1 Hindustin® which
deals with the tsfiir Iterature tells us that the story of
‘Adam began in Ceylon (Serendit) and Q5bi! hulled Hi:
on a local bill, Adam mourned the loss of Hibil for a
‘hundred years, chen he had other children born, Further
soformation regarding Adam falling near Sarandsp (Serandib)
and Ese falling near Jaddsh 1s given by Suy itu.

Baibagi and Tabst¥ also eeicerate the story of the Fall of
‘Adam 1n India ot Ceylon, Ceylon being then a port of India
‘Tabatt says that Adam then travelled to Meeca and finally
returned to Ceylon where be began to hive sand Ghszzil
repeats the same, Regarding the grave of Adam Ghazzilf
gives two reports—according to one he was butied at Mecea
tn the Ghir1 Abs Qubsss and according to another at a
mountain (sabal s Biz) an Ceylon Much of this 1s
contirmed by Mastidi and Suyati.

The gust of all these nateations 1s that Adam, drwven
from paradise, dropped on the soil of Hindustin and it was
in Hindustin that the waby—the divine revelation—eame
to him, Sucb being the eatliest connectton of India with
Islam, 1t would be hy no means incorrect to say that Iskim
came inte India in a peaceful manner through the Arabs,
and not through the warrior Turks

Before giving a brief account of the waruor Turk and
has sway an Trin and India (verses 534-596) ‘simi analyses

1 Ghulam Aly Azad~Sabbate'l Maryan Fr Zusrea Hindusten,
Bormbays 1177, H pps 7 43
2 Idem

"4 EUTOHU S-SALATIN

ten bane factors in the composition of his great epic
Futly bis dese to leave belund an offspring on bis
departure from India, Secondly bus peesonified Poetic Genius
which he considered his consott, capable of conceiving,
and begetting sues Thirdly hus success in obtaining &
patron in king *Aliuddin Hasan Babmani, Fourthly bis
sufferings at the hands of the emperot Muhammad bio
Tughlug, Frftbly tis chosen role of an epie wnter of
India like the geeat Firdausi of Tein, Stxtbly hus disike of
the umehonoured society and bis resolve to quit India
Seventbly bus emulation of Nizimt and Firdauid—uhe great
and famous poets in the domain of marnaci, Eightbly
hs industty combined with bis devotion to Islamic bustotys
Intetature and bagiclogy. Nentbly his sich amagination and
syotbetie mind and ability to build histotical sequences
Tentbly and lastly the appreetation of his work an the
hgh exrcles of the tebel chiefs, euphemistcally called kings.

‘Isiexi was bon an India and lived a India, and
desired—like bis ancestots who had lived and matted
sm India and died in India Jeaving behind cluldren,—t0
Teave behind a progeny, But he wos suill a bachelor
at the age of forty and wanted to tetite to a life
‘of eclibacy and seclusion at Mecca, One night he made his
Heart speck to his own Poetic Genius and the late
promsed him a Iarge progeny in the form of verses
Isimf approved of this, for such a progeny of verses which
hs consort was capable of begerrig was far better 10 his
‘eyes than tssues from a physical marrage,

In the course of a reverie oF roctutnal union with bis
‘contort suggestions came to him that he should quit India
with a firm resolution to perform a pilgrimage at Mece
and that he should rejoice to prepare for a journey to the

SHAH NAMAH INTRODUCED B

Hyjz which would enable bim to discover the path of
Truth These suggestive ebougbts coming from within revived
bis soul and he was spurred to activity. He resolved to lose
no time and proceed immediately to pilgrimage. But the
spint of lus sesolution relaxed before long, and he became
half-bearced, lus mind being swayed by ats love for India—
the land of bis birth and chat of his ancestors. He felt
that in case he left India for good he must leave belund
2 souvenir like his ancestors who were responsible for
descendants hike himself, Then he decided to follow Ins

ancestors an this respect,

‘Isimal recalled how different was lus own position from
that of his forefathers, He was determined to keep himself
free from the worries of mamned hfe, He might sausty
himself with slave gitls whom he could ehange frequently.
But he aborted the dea of unsung himself with these,
rather he would concol himself and drown bis passion
sn the pursut of bustory and ehe composition of 3 Book OF
Kings—a Shab Nama, He believed that hus verses in that
book would be hus best offspring and progeny.

Then ‘Isiait began to look for a patron For about two
months he remained absorbed in this search, One day
carly in the morning there came a eouner from Qict
Bahiu‘ddin, the supenntendent of petitions at the court
of ‘Aliu'ddin Hasan Babmang, king of Daulatibid and
Gulbarga, ‘Isim? went to his house and told his own
story. The gies inetoduced him to the said hing who
permitted him to weite the proposed Shab Namah.

imi had suffered all hus Ife at the hands of times
and people. Hence his complant about bis age and the
lack of true scholarship. He was also disgusted with Indian


6 FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

society and the conditons of Ife, then obtaining. He did
not like the manners snd morals of the people about him.
Hence he resolved to quit this coootry. But whet kind of
2 souventt must he leave behind before his depatrute? This,
was the prablem he eonfeanted.

He was a born poet lthe the great Amir Khusrau and was
Jus contemporaty too But be did aot like his long-winded
thetorie and made #0 attempt to umizate him. On the
contrary he Inked Khwlja Nigam and FirdausT and acrempted
to draw inspitation from chem, On the lines of ther
work he began his own, and as soon as his eptc, which
he had depicted as 2 Shab Namah, drew towards a
close he sent icin parts from Davlaabid to the diferent
provinces which bad either overthrown the yoke of the
emperor ot were atrempnng to do so. When the rebel
chiefs who were engeged im the Wer On Zils? read st they
liked se immensely; end wishing them victory in ehett
struggle, ‘Isimt named his book Futibs's-Salitin, that 15
‘Vierories of Kings, He says

“On tealzing chat_monarchs* draw inspiration from
this book and that they achieve vietones chrougb
reading 16, 1 named se FutibutsSlitens®

1 Hansa, AM—Taghlug Dynasty. 298,

2 The term monarchs of Sangs mn the conte ofthe Fatiba's-
Sala andthe verses 1162811609 teers howe rebel chiefs who
schered wctones over the Zl esperor sad ser up at kings, for
snstnce ia Bengal and the Deca

3 FST vere 11639

CHAPTER IV

SHAH NAMAH LABQURED
MAHMOD OF GHAZNI IDOLIZED
Verses 604-1177

6 FUTOHU'SSALATIN

society and the conditions of hfe, dhen obtaining. He did
not like the manners and motals of the people about bum,
Hence he resolved to quit this conatry, But what kind of
2 souvenit must he leave bebind before his depattute? This
was the ptoblem he confronted.

He was a born poet like che great Amit Khusrau and was
‘ns contemporary too, Bur he dha not hike Ins fong-winded
fhetoric and made no ateempt to rmutate him. On the
contraty he hiked Khwiys Nigiml and Firdausl and attempeed
to draw mspication from them. On the lines of that
work be began bis own, and as soon as bis epic, which
hhe had depicted as a Shib Namab, drew towards 2
close he sent iti pares ftom Davlatdbid to the different
provinces which bad ember overthrown the yoke of the
emperor ot wete attempting to do so, When the rebel
chiefs who were engaged on the WVar On Zalim? read st they
Weed it immensely; and wishing them victory in chet
steuggle, ‘Isimi named hus book Futibu’sSelitin, that 35,
Mictoties of Kings, He says

‘On tealizing chat monatchs? draw mspieation from
this book and hat they achieve victories through
reading it, I named at Futibu’sSalatin.” ®

1 Hosaia, AM—Tugéug Dynasty, p. 298,
2 The term monarchs or laogs in the context of the Fatihn'e
Salijn and the verses 1162812629 efees to those rebel chiefs who
sieved victories over the Zalm emperne and setup at kings, for
istance in Bengal and the Decean.
3 FS. Le verse 1639.


CHAPTER 1V

SHAH NAMAH LABOURED
MAHMOD OF GHAZNI IDOLIZED
Verses 604-1177

BEGINNING OF THE FUTOHU'S SALATIN

From the
Subuktigin Ghi

604 1 enter the domain of history. I give life to the
dead again.

Sultin Mabmiid of Ghtzm son of
May Allah stlursine sbewr souts\

Gog Let me say who was the first? to have come into
this land victorious like the king of Rim.

606622 Lhave been told by men of lett mind in
rhythmical and elegant language thar in the yeat? 361
that king of Ghszni—who was undoubtedly and unmistak-
ably the father of Mshmid and a mighty king of the
Turks and a bezel of the rmg of sovereignty and was
named Subukeigin—was asleep one nigh et an auspicious
hhour on the bejewelled throne.

G12 61q He beheld in a dream that in the compound
of hus palace had sprung a lofty tree under whose shadow
flourished a world Tt shaded rhe wetld, teansforming it
into a garden and putged the universe of dust,

615-616 That very night one of the king's wives who
‘was pregnant begot a son under whom the wotld became
illumined from end to end

617 In that might there was a constellation of favour-
able stars, at was the might of *4si * Iam told

618-619 At day break the mighty king sent for the

1 Le Mahmud Ghezos
2 AD o7t

3, The tenth day of Mfmbarram, frst month of Islamic calendar.
p

80 FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

dream interpreters and related to chem bis dream of the
preceding aight unreservedly.

620-629 Out of that lucky group of dream incer-
preters one man who was the most expenienced of all
‘opened lus lips an praise of the emperor (sbibinsbib),
saying:

“May you enjoy your dominion for ever! Your
‘Miyesty* has bebeld a very happy dream. The
interpretation 1s thar che prince who 1s born
last night will open to the world the gate of
prosperity. He will eaprure the world under
lucky stars and will become a remarkable figure
an administrtion, He will bring the seven
countries (baft sglim)? under bis control and
vwll revive the gatden of Lim, To begin
with be will march upon India, his oops
crossing the Indus readily. He will run
Euphrates out of rhe mnfides’ blood, and raze
ro the ground rhe ado! bouse of Somslth. Later
be wall unsbeatbe the sword of wrath and
capture all the other countnes Your Mayesty
(bibensbabs f2q)? may well be congratulated

1 The Persan please Shab Jebin (given an the tex) heeraly
means king of the wold

+ The seven sglims known to the Muslin world of 6th century
Hiyea were as follows

(© lelim of Hisd (0) Iglm of So (ui) Tati of Tooth
Gr) Tain of Rein (0) gli of Afogua (ri) Talim of Arb
(i) Iglim of Teka

Meymaleta-Tasinbl, MS of 520 Hiya, edited by Babie 10
1318 Shams,

3. Leerly emperor of the world

SHAH NAMAH LABOURED St

for thus deeam at well as for the birth that took
place last night.

630 When the king heard this tneerpretation, he
became exceedingly happy.

631-634 Then he gave that baby che suspicions name
Mahmid together wich the epithet Nizim? and the
patronymic Abu'l Qinm2 He otdered che servants to
bring hum up eatefully and look after him strenuously,

635 By the me Mahmiid was twenty-four yeats old,
Providence fiteed him tn every way.

636-637 Wherever arose a difficulty at was solved by
um. His Facher addressed hum as Sarfu'ddawalt and sent
hhum to the country of Khucisia to rule os governots

Death of Subuktigin and accession of Mebmind Sbib
Ghsznavi. May Alle stlumine their tombsl
And bis invasion of the country of Hindustin,

+ Steinguss (PersiansEnglub Dicionery, p.1190) says that
Mahoud ts the name of an elephant mentioned in the Quean,
Stemgats has had 19 view the Stra Fal (elephant) one hundred. fifth
Sura of the Quran which describes the event of 670 A.D, when
Abraha the Chrtsuan ruler of Yemen invaded Mecea at the head of
sn aemy of elephants One of these 1 said to have been a white
dlephant named Mahendd, But this finds no mention m the Queen

‘foam considers che namie auspicious heeause it 1 one of the
ames of God

2 Nein (hterlly good ordet) ngaufes a laudable attnbute of
ar as adennistrator of an empire
om (htzelly dstributor) 158 name of God

4 The we of Snfu'ddelab (word of he srs) ws confeed
fonSultan Mabasid by Amur Noh Samant of Bukacd who also
conferred the ale of Nanru‘ddin (helper of fla) on Makrmud's
father Subuktgin T. Fel, p 356

Daal ts the plural of dawlat mesoing state,

6


& FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

638-639 When the yest! 387 liad advanced a few
months the satd king of Ghazni died and Mahmud became
emperor at Ghazni.

640-644 The coure staff consteucted a hall the height
of which passed beyond Pletades. In that hnall was placed
4 gold throne which Maheid ascended, weating the crown
and royal tobe. The chiefs bowed to hint submussively
ied ham well The negibs
announced the new king 1m loud voice wiule the envious
sn thae ball buent hike wild re.

645-646 Wich the object of nourishing the world God
sent fim tnto the world and Mahmiid prepared che ground
for the nursing of Faith tn chs world, opening the door of
liberality co the peoples

647 1 am cold that an the same year chat liom
hheateed man led an expedition to India ogainst the infidels.

everywhere and all rulers

648-652 Suddenly he swept unto Indta and bus success
pleased bus frends. In one assault he defeated the Hinds
contingents and Rat Jarp3t fell prrsoner anco his hands. He
took him co temote Ghrzni and entrusted him co a broket
of the slave market. Then under hus orders Jaip3l was sold
by the marker agents for a sum of eighty dinars, which was
deposited in the ereasury 2

3 AD 597

2 Thuss a teference to Malus sada on Indhs eommenang
from 1000 AD /390 Hyra Alter eapronng some forts nese
Lamaghan and Kabul be made an attack oa Jupil, the ruler of
Watind lying on che west bask of the Indus, fifteen mules
orth of Attock Raja Japa whote dopustons extended fom
Lamaghin and Kabul to the ser Chinab aod from southeen
Kashar to Multan was defeated, He was taken pruoner tupethet


SHAH NAMAH LABOURED 83

653-654 In (the year?) 377 the emperor went to the
terctory of Balkh, When that city and uts surroundings
fell into lus hands he stayed 1n that eapttal for one or evo
years.

655 He overran the Herit land completely and then
led the troops to Guyarit.

Story of the Induen philosophers’ findings and of
the Indian messengers’ journey t0 Ghazni presenting
jzya to Mabmid, son of Subuktigin, prior to bis king-
ship and making 4 pledge.

656657 1 heard a story reported correctly by honest
and eloquent narrators to the effect tat in the course of the
ancient history of India the Huid6 astronomers jointly made
a forecast

658 663 Alter seriously deliberating on their forecast,
they came to the conclusion that one Malmad would arise
in Ghazof, giving to the world the message of justice and
generosity. Ac the age of ten, lus light would pass beyond
the remotest pares of lie world. His horoscope showed
that in the succeeding order of kings he would remsin
unparalleled, that he would fead an army against the
garden-ike country of India, penetrate into its pleasant

veth some of hus sons and granihons De Nasi (MG p &)
says that the sole of Jaupal to which “Unsusn makes 2 reference,
smeaat only the fixing of Japal’s ransom Hodivals (51M H,
Pp xin aoe and 191-193) 18 of optven thst ‘Ja) pals was publicly
exposed atone of the slaverauerons 1a some market 4 Khorasan,
“Was impresss on the reader a similar ides Pechaps |sipSl was
set among ondary slaves and rain adated to
10 thy manner
1 AD gf

complete surrender

84 FUTOHU'S SALATIN

avenues and chat he would eapeure the whole of Gujarat and
demolish the idol-house of Somnath.

664-665 When according eo that forecast the asro-
nomers noticed in che given period che identical signs,
they went to their own king and told them chis story.

666-676 When Jatpil rhe ruler heard st, he ealled his
imsters (0 2 private meeting and eceaprtulated the story.
O Rat of Hindustin’, said che ministers in reply:

‘May this garden flourwh under you | An opening
ts made in a utensil of rough clay, and a colt
18 not tamed after € has grown to a cipe age, We
hhave heard that that boy of Turkish descent 15
pow ten eats old, Ir behoves the Rat to snd
hum great amount of accumulated wealth and
‘money, ashing him thus through messengers to
aecepe the same as preys? on condition that of
Is tavading India and eaptuting the territory
of Guyseie and the sdol-house of Somnath, he
would give che Indian idol back co the Hindus,
che he should refund our money.

677 When Jarpil Weard chis suggestion of his
‘unusters he accepted 1¢ whole-heartedly.

678-688 He sene some messengers together with money
and presents co thae young and glorious prince whom they
saw immediately on theit ateival in Ghazni, They found him
playing with boys, They went up to him an. good ehects

x The we of eye on this occasion is not sunfed, the
frctentsor money that che lodua menengers gave to Mahood
being kind of bnbe cr gfe olfert co procare a ertsin objec,

SHAH NAMAH LABOURED 85

and placing before hum all che presents in grear humility,
they said:
+O Viewous Prince! We have come from Hindus:
tin to Ghazni", that 1s, from a gatden into a
pradise The king of Hindustin has sent us
to yout palace with dusmessage—O enlightened
prince | Accept my presents kindly on this
condition hat when you become king of
Ghazot steiang your own coin and when you
overrun Gujatit and seize the idol of Somnith,
you may rake all che gold, elephants and
peatls elise _mughe fall 1nco your hands along
with the iol bue give us the stone pieces of
the idol.”

688-690 When Mahm@d, a prince of sharp intellect,
heard thts he aceepted the presents, saying.

L accepe the condition so earnestly offered by the
Rit of Hindustin.”

6g This done, the Indian inessengees rerutoed to
thee own counny,

692-693 When subsequently Mahinid succeeded
his farher as king, he led an army against India and
arrived in the region of Gujarat.

694696 1 have learnt from old hustocies that he
uptoored the anctent sdothouses, seizing from them an
immense amount of wealth that astounded the world,
The Hindi sdol which had been the deity of Hindustan also
fell into hus hands

697-702 The aged ripe wearers of che sacred thread
then went up ro the pzysaccepting king with abundant
gold and innumerable pearls. They reiinded him of the
promise lhe had made at Ghazui. Finding it improper to


86 FUTOHU S SALATIN

demtate from bis promise the king could chunk of uo reply.
He acceded ro thete request, saying?

‘Since we have already made a promise it would not
be proper on out part to renounce 1t, Too
morrow at sunrise you will eke from me thar
stone which has not been damaged’.

703. Then they withdrew from the king's presence in
profound submission and returned home,

704709 Bur the king now fele dsitessed for he
confronted an odd situation. Sharp wirted as he was he
thoughe within Inxself

TET give them the dot I hecome on sdolselet.
Tomorrow when the dead life these heads ftom
the pillow of dust I would be publicly exposed
for sdolsellimg. 1 would be branded like
Rast the adol maker, If Ido nor give back
the idol I would be nicknamed Mahmid the
pledge breaker, How should | extrieate myself
fcom tlus dificult srtuation for here 1s a ghost
bbelund me and a well before me?”

710 After dunking seriously over rhe matrer His
Majesty (Shab + jebin') ated x a conclusion in the
manner of wse men.

734715 The following day when from the sky's
shire dhe deity® of the Hindus emerged, the hing gave the
{following command:

‘Ler the Somnath of the Hindus be burut and turned
quickly into lime, When the said sdal-worship-
pets—wearers of the sacred thread—come here

4 Laeslly king of the world, 2 That u, the sua

SHAH NAMAH LABOURED 8

at ducbar time they should be presented with
betel leaf coated with that lime so that out
promise be fulfilled and our old pledge
honoured.”

7%6 Then the king held a levee from the gotd thrones
to his lefe and righe stood Luck and Prosperity.

717-718 The Hindus arcved according to their
appointment and peeformed the pibos co His Majesty
everyone sat under Ins orders by the line of shoes in the
royal court,

719. Then came the betelleaf beatet and acted as the
king had ordered tum to do.

720-723 Alter chewing the betel those misguided

people stood before His Majesty. They pratsed lum and
‘then said in all humiltey:

‘May ¢ please Your Mayesty (Shiba wald tabart) to
order thar the dol be broughe and given back
tous—aHinda minorny, You are a king of
good repute and right faith, May st please you
to fulfil your old promise 1°

724-727 When the king heard thus he laughed and
sad

“You mnsdicected people 1 The sdol which you are

deinanding of me and for which you are raising

such a clamour has been already consuined by

you along with the betel-lesf. Give up the

‘vain hope now, for henceforth your temple 1s

x Licerally kissing the foot

2 Tabar means root, engin, Shihes wile tabzr therefore may
‘be translated as ‘hang of an illustrious house *

88 FUTOHU'S SALATIN

your own stomachs wlach you should wotship.
anstead ol the idol.”

728-729 Frustrated, those misguided people wihdcew
from the coyat presence. They went into mourning and
some tote up their stomachs through grief

730 Long after thae maiden a peest (ro'brd) played
a trick,

Trick played by an Indien priest for the recovery of Menit

738-732 Tam told thar at a distance of an arton's
fight that accuesed fellow buned a piece of stone, He
id not dilose this to any one and concealed the matter
from all human beings.

733. He brought a tender ealf and began to reat te

734-735 In that very place where he had butted the
stone he deposited a talisman. Then he placed 2 few
seers of barley there with which he began to feed the calf,

73673/, It became the calf's habie that every morning
con bei g lee loose from the house, he ran diteet to the
place where the stone lay hidden,

738-739 Tn hus wake stepped that tdol-worshupper
wih 2 Barley bowl and a suck in band He used to feed
the ealf on barley at the given place and then recutned home.

740° Some time after this mneident the said Brahman
‘began to laugh, one morning.

744-742 A neighbour enquired why he was laughing
parueuarly a¢ 2 stme when be should have been exys0g

1 Some angemous stones glonifying Mabmid’s wetory #¢
Somnith crept io Mush Ineratore ‘Thus story a9 toatance of
ppure fabrication sods devond of histones! truth

SHAH NAMAH LABOURED 8

suace the whole of Guyseie ad gone into mourming om
account of the annihilation of their deity Manit.*

743-748. On hearing us the Brahman satd
‘Sorcow has given place to happiness, The time.
for mourning 1n Gujarat has passed Last might
that idol told me ma dream — worry nor and
donor be sorry ady more, You have a calf im
your house, let 1 loose at day break, Pursu
Jum wherever he goes with a whole crowd of
tdol-worshippers, collected together At which-
ever place the calf smells the exteh, thece The
underneath in seclusion.”

749-750 When the said neighbour heard ehe above
story he said.

‘Make haste, © conveyer of good news! Set your
heare on doing tls very quickly *

751-762 Afterwards boty of dose unrighteous.
fellows went to ther respecive elders and narrated thts
mmeident before an assembly of the Brahmans, Then the
calf was untied, and when st began t0 tun those misguided
people followed 1r, When the calf, followed by the ecowd of
idol-worshuppers, reached the place where 1¢ vsed to ake
barley every day, ar smele ehe earch 1n search of the batley?,

1 Manat was one ofthe theee famous tdols of pagan Arabia.
“Tsam has uleoufied st with Somnath of India Although the
anuquity of Somnath (Jord of the moon—som meaning. soon
and nath agnitying master) 12 well established (MG 210) 102
sdeotficaton wich the Arabian Somnath but fancfel
M G Appendix M

2 This story of the alt as avother sostance of
dagenuity and has no historical hasis

Also see

90 FUTOHU'SSALATIN

Seeing this, chose misguided people sposted and dug up
the earth fot a yard or two, and tn the coutse of digging
found a stone, They pulled 1t out and washed 1¢ clean thee
fumes with rose water. Then they withdrew from that plain
and held a féte everywhere, They made decorations of all
sides and muscal melodies proceeded from lane to lane, The
‘ary was decorated from end sp end and the walls and doocs
were covered with brocade. From every house in Gujarit
tose a noise. In the course of that day Manit became
Somnath.

753770 1 am sold when che talented Mahmtd
marched upon Hidustia che idol Somnith fll soto hus
hhands, He burnt 2 pare of st in Gujatie and took the
rump to Ghsznt, There he ordeted that denty of infidelity
to be broken and that stone to be eut into four pisces. One
of these was to be placed at the chreshold of the royal
court, the second was to be taken by the lucky group of
breakers to the cheshold of the inosque of Friday ptayet,
the third piece was to be carried to Medina and placed at
the threshold of ies shrine, and the foueth piece—datk dust
—was co be delivered at the sanctuary of the Katbs2

774773 About that tume, I am told, here eamie
fom the house of caliphate a royal robe for the king whose
hheart was clared at thus happy event, Never before had

such a recognition been accorded to any king from the
hhouse of caliphate?

+ Teal shat some portions of this wal were ser to Mecca
sd Baghlfd and some were thrown aa front of the Jae May
s Ghent ad the palace of the Sultan (M Gu p 118) Abo
sere n, 103

> Qadie bin Mugtadie the Abbond caliph sent eheough «
-pecil envoy hi fictanons to Mahmod. snd. beatoned on him

SHAH NAMAH LABOURED *

774778 When at last His Majesty had obtained
recognition from the glotious Abbasids he led his troops
against and eaptured the country of Khutisin by the
strength of fortune. The elephants in his auiny amounted
to two thousind and the lustre of his positon blinded
the eyes of che enviets. About fout thousand of bellieose
and suotd-brandubing slaves collected under hhis standard.
He buile a strong bridge of boats over the Oxus and defea-
ted many an atmy of Irn and Titan.

779 He octupied Khurisin by the sttength of Faiths
no one got the better of him 1m battle,

780 Khurdsin and Kbwatizm as well as Hindustin
revived like a garden through lus justice.

781 Thatlion-hearted man captured the whole world?s
At lase, he departed ftom thts world,

Deure of Prophet Mubammad Mustefi—peace end
blessing of Allah on bym—to see the features
of Mabmid son of Subuktigin and bss seeing
him.

the tile of Kebfu'ddenleb weltstim (refuge of the State and
lin) T.F Bombay), vol lp 60

1 Mahad s empice was the greatest the world had seen since
‘the collase of the Reman empme, and st was larger than the empire
of the Abband caliphs. Ie stretched from the cisSutley regton—
Bhatinds, Thavesar, Sitsa and Hinsi—to the Caspian region and
from Lamaghin, Balk and Mary w Kurduseio, Ie included
Khuridio, Hamadin, lsphahio, Kubistin, Zabulstin and the
Helonnd valley aud desere as well ay all the teritories now inelided
am Afghanistan. He had mint centres spread over al this area; and
Inscoins steuck at Ghozol, Nubipir, Herit, Juin, Balkh and
Libor (Msbmidpur) are all seen,


9 FUTOEU'S-SALATIN

782-783 1 am told that when the last of the prophets
bhad by the strength and geace of God overtheown the idols
of Uzzi and Lat, mo idol remained in the world but
Manse, .

784787 One might the Prophet prayed catnestly
and in secret co the universal Creator attd said:

‘By the power of Fatth I have removed all the sdols
from the face of the catth, No sol bas
Femaned in the world except Manit which has
become the deity of the tcittory of Gujarit,
My heart as worrying 2s co how I should
demolish st since this one deny of the
fire-woeshppers has sucvived.’

788-792 The moment this thought Rashed across the
mind of Abmad down eame the divine message, Swufely
awed Gabriel, the messenger of the Soul Ceeators covtt.
Alter presenting salim and blessing of God to Mugtall he
communested dis divine eedainmene, saying

“Alter you a king wall arse from among yout own
emincat followers, bearing the name Malmid
who wall surely break ehe house of Somnath,’

793-795 The honest Gabriel conveyed this divine

message €© Abmad of pure faith, Then Akmad prayed
camestly to God, saying:

'O Lord (Ys Rab), show me the face of that hor

Hike man clus very day by Thy omnipotence

and strengehen my soul with the light of bis
face.’

796 That very moment Mabmid was shown co the
Prince of prophets, I am told,

SHAH NAMAH LABOURED 3

797 On seeing him the Prophet pray ed'—'O Lord,
give bum the hey of the worl
798-799 Three hundred and odd yeats after thts, I
am told, Mahmid the virewous became the capruter of the
world and raided Guyarit and demolished the temple of
Somnath. *
Story of Sultin Mebmitd's entense lace for Ayiz.
Sultan Mabmniid questioned by the enviers and

bis reply.

Boo A perion who 1s not absorbed in making love 1s
fot worth a grain of barley in the mart of love,

Bor Many a master becomes a slave through the
pursue of love. Love 1s 2 bait which enrangles the
hunter himself.

1 Te sbould be emembered that Hokin Sant (8. 1931/526)
bad set Sulf-En Mahmid as sdolsbreaker at Somodth hy the nde of
the Prophet who had deseroyed the wls ia the sanctuary of the
Kieba, His verses quoted hy Funbta (T. Fa Ts pe 57) tun a5
fellows

Kesha Somnith ebun alts
Sbud ze Mabmid o Mubsrimed pat
Tn 20 Kaba butan buriin andi
Wan 2e kan Sonenatb rd paredatt
(The Kieba and Somnath Loth were made eleaa ike the sky by
Mahmud and Muhsamad Winle Motanmad threw out idols
{com the Kfaba, Mahevod dhl the same at Somntth through wat )
Abu'l Majd Majdud bun Adam commonly known as Hakim
Sanat was a court poet under Sultin Mahmud of Gharm. He
syperss to have sold his conscience 10 the Sultin whom he
Pleased by composing the sbove veces
But iets nexther fate noe reasonable to brag Propliet Mchammad
take preture In fat, he ws msuleed on being bracketed with «

Tolilypance ke Mahmid, History knows no. sminey
jetween there two

o

4 FUTOHUS SALATIN

802 In this pursuit 2 eich man and a pauper ace
equal and whosoever becomes captive in this net
experiences trouble

803. In the dominion of love kings wear covese cloth
and. in the pleasure party of love the sult sips the dregs of
the wine cup

804 Through pursuit of love angels fall nto 2 well
of troubles and human bemgs fall inco calamities,

B05 A person who keeps out of the way of love 1
‘not a human bing and an angel who keeps out of this
well 1s not an angel

Bo6 A pecton who docs oot stake bis (or bet) head
1m this pursuit 1s outside the catavan of mankind

807 In lus caravan lookl every morning and evening
‘a master trudging like a she camel cartes the burden of a
slave

B08 809 Ihave heard from the nartators of secret
stories that when Mahmud fell in love? with Ay lus
langslup was tcansformed nto slavery, Ins steadiness was
teplaced by diseaction

Bre Another man became kung of his dominion, @
slave became the ruler of a kang

811812 Since the king was a vigilant man he
acquitted himself warily an that matter Outwardly he
was a stong king, inwardly he was a slave to Ayiz

1 Ia fact Suleay Mahmud was ta love with tle s ster of bis
Turks slave Abu Noym Ayar bin Umaq and be ultimately marned
hhee On account of this relation there was geouine affection 1m
the Sultan's mund for Aya toe Bue there was po illert love and
co ld not be« y between the two See “Awfi—Jemi | Hikayat,
1943 p 25° Alsose MG p 153

SHAH NAMAH LABOURED 95

813-815 To all appearanee he was busy, night and
day, with the Srate affairs and the State matters sequired
glory through ims at heart, he was ceaselessly intimate
and always a companion of Aylz, In secret, he had no
work except the pursuit of loves other than this, he had no
engagement,

816 After some rime had passed in this manner the
kiog’s attitude revealed hs love.

817-818 Bringing about separation between any two
{ends 1s the convention of jealous times, Jealous people
arose on ll sides antent on bringing about separation,
Love 1s such an essential feature of Ife that in this matter
reptoach is applieable even to the angels.

819 However, some of the enviets contended that
Mahmid’s love was something beyond the eategory of
physteal love while others ptotested saying: ‘Ayaz has
cooked a magic.”

820823 One day a group of those cruel enviers—
rebukers of che virtuous—wene ro the king and said,
O kang, refuge of the world; undoubtedly you belong to
the class of saints: yours 1s the doininion of holiness.
Should Your Majesty promise us protection, we would place
before you a puzzle’,

824 On hearlng this His Majesty suid, ‘Our with
your puzzle immediately, please.’ They said:

825-830 ‘Your Majesty—the pride of wise men—you
administer justice to others; yer personally you misbehave.

How ts this? Tell us the rruth, Why do you bestow
all your favours on Ay3z to the exclusion of all those
who ate very close to you? As for the princes in


96 FUTOHU'S SALATIN

patuicular—men of standing and liberal anstinets—Your
Majesty has not im your heart of heatts even oneenth of
sthe love that you have for Ayaz. Since this pornt has been
distressing us we are compelled co speak out our minds.”

831 834 On heating thts awkwatd question from them,
the hing was highly distressed and said to humselfs Its
etter to heep the story of Ayaz a sectet and to reply to
their awkward question by meansof an allasion.” Then be
said to them, “I shall give yon the teply to-morrow’,

835837 Next day, at sunnse His Mayesty mounted
2 cavaleade and proceeded from the capital glotiously
ike the sun. He went hunting to a distance of a few
parasangs,* shooting down the game wherever found,

838-845 Lam told that he stood for a while in a
valley watching the approach of a eatavan, Then he
cordeced ls young son Ibeahim co proceed on horsehach
towards the caravan and enquire, ‘Whence ate they
coming"? [beiliim proceeded; and on enguiting of @
member of the eatavan (haraodri) was told chat the eacavan
was comin, from the country of Exhopta. Then Ibrihia
fenurned with great speed and communicated the sane
informaton «co the king.

846-347 His Mayesty (sbab-1 nim) sent bum agan
saying, ‘Go and make another enquiry of the caravan
‘whither they are going tn such large numbers",

848-850 Resolved again, Iam told, to catty out the
order of she righteous king Ibrahim enguited a second tume
of a Kirwioi thetr destination, saying: ‘To which part of
lus chosen country ts the caravan intending to travel?

1 Ose par
bia,

og Mertang) as 2 dutance of enelve thousand

SHAH NAMAH LABOURED 7

851 That kirwint said in eeply to the prince, “We
antend to go to Heese.”

852 Again, the punee ran to the king and comm:
exed whatever be had heaed feom the kirwin.

853 His Majesty ordered the prince a thied tine
to go and enquire, what merchandise was being carted
by the caravan,

854-855 Arthied ene the prince went accordingly,
came back quickly after making the enquiry and teported
the matter to His Majesty (Sbzb + yabin).

856-864 For the fourth time he deswed that virruous
Ayfz should go. The intent of the royal look, for His
Mayesty had merely looked towatds bum, was understood
by Ayizy and considering tt asa royal otdet, he set ont
towards the caravan, He made enquiries from the caravan
owners and after obraining ali the information, favourable
et unfavourable—their numbers, their merchandise, their
profit and loss—he reported he same forthwith to His
Majesty teproducing all che details from beginning to
end. Thereupon His Majesty eurning to those experienced
people who fiad put the awkward question sat

‘From enquiry made about the patticulars of the
caravan it has wow become clear what the

princes ate worth, Cereainly according to the
men of judgment the noble Aylz deserves
favours.”
865 Tam rold chat im this manner the king silenced
chose unrighteous people.
The prayer of Sultin Mabmid of Ghsznt (may Alleb
tllummate bis evidence)—made while returning
from Hindustan to Gheeni—ts beard,

Pd FUTUHU'S-SALATIN

866.870 When Mahmiid the conqueror of countries,
Tam told, started from Hindustin for Ghazni, a misguided
fellow hailing from the frontier of Hindustin appeared before
Jum in the suburbs of Sind and said, “I am an expert guide.
and in my own line E possess a magieian-lke skill Should
Your Majesty order me I would put on my head the
sutde's eap, I shall chen take the troops to Ghazni through
a short eur, doing two months" journey in rhe course of
fone month’.

871873 As soon as the king heard this from that
rrattor Hindi who was destined to mislead hum, he ordered
fuum to aet a5 guide to the coyal contingents,

874-879 In shore, after the army had proceeded a
few stages they fell sneo a wild desert! which was dreadful
4m appearance and fatal to mankind and bristing with

1 Sultin Mabmud’s victory at Somntth having created
reat rtlerners and resentment among the neighbounag Hindu
chuels one Patam Devs, ras of Annbilwata Patan, intended o block
the Sultan's journey from Somaith, bottling bim up between tbe
Arravalt hills and the Rann of Cutch Bur the sheewd Suliin
preeladed such a treacherous move on the part of the enemy by
hanging bus rue and by following tstead an obseure and lengthy
path through Catch and Siod Ou atenang at an arm of the #3
between Kathiawar and Cutch he crossed it over to the other side,
taking his army too acrous the vast sheet of water with great
shill” Then he thteatened Param) Dera in his onn domain of
Anohilwaca Patan But Param Deva disappeared ftom sight
‘king shelter am hus fortress of Kanthot, south of Patan. Suln
‘Mabmdd capeuted this fortress also, hur Param Deva made good
Iseseape Then the Sulkin muehed notthwaed to Annbileara
Patan" Acodirg co Fb he edie that he deed
fo make st bs pronnonal expel, evtsting Giyszm to hy 300
‘Mavad (T.F. 1 p57). Bur hus amcs dissuaded bet fom adopting
this course, So, placing Goycat wader the rule of aca Behan


SHAH NAMAH LABOURED 99

thotns, no verdure ever having grown in ic, Ie was an
open expanse with caves after caves and plains and Lully
tracts from end to end, It was a mirage which no one
had penetrated. Neither had this desett ever been
frequented by a human being nor was there in ie any living
being barring demons and fierce dragons; nor had
ies suelace been made wet by water since Noah's deluge,

880885 Through lack of paths the troops became
desperate giving up every’ hope of recovery. Then that
deceitful guide appeared before Hlis Majesty (¢bib-i nlmuar')
and said:

‘From this place waeer is neat at hand; order the
atmy to speed.”

In this manner and by means of such a lie that
Aesertwandering demon made the royal army wander
about through another day and night, The following
day they atrived at a place wherein, on all sides, they
saw nothing bue Kaebala.® Neither water was visible

Dabashlie the Sultin made 2 eireumeous journey ehrough the Thi
desert en route Multis, But while moving through the Thic
desert and che waterless and sandy regions of Réjputina he was
‘duped by a local Brahman—a devotee of Somsnith—who misguided
bie and ehrew him wto an inconceivable dusters, The Sultia
prayed earnestly to Allah to thow hie the right path which came
nto sight subsequently, sm puesing which he txavelled to
Ghoul. See abo M.G.p. 119 Ey

+ Liteally ‘a renowned king!

2 Name of a place in“eiq which became in 680/61 the scene
ofa great teagedy commonly known as Tragedy of Karbala, ‘This
took place fey years after the death of Propet Mubammad. when
bis grandson Imim Husain was driven by the new Umayyad
government of Yazid from Medina and Mecca and forced yo
cencamp in che waterless plain of Katbala, Wich a enuall follaning


s00 FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

there nor any road; and the whole army was morafied
through* theese,

886-888 Then che king summoned that misguided
demon, I am told; and enquired of lum, saying :

‘Wat was your actual intention by thus teacherouly
throwing us into a wrong track? Was
contewvance of yours to destroy ws?"

889-895 On heating this from ehe king that Hinds
sadt

*O talented lang t Verity T came from Gujatic to take
vengeance of Manit and to despatch Your Majesty to
the nexe world, Many a tame I tered an the course of this
journey to srnke a sword o your head in snadvertence.
When I found shat 1 was unable to get the upper hand
‘of you through violence I planned this trick co destroy
your army. With the intention of bneying them ave
toler eluest I broughe them into this waterless desert.
Now that I have succeeded in achieving my object, it
is up co you to kill me or spare me as you please’.

896897 On heating this from that satanie and

‘ot seventy-two men including his siemonth-cld son “Ali Asghst,
‘Josain was besieged by an army of 30,000 armed horsemen winder
theorlers of Yasil, son of Mu'dwhs, Yasid csimed to be the
caliph and sucesse of Prophet Muhammad sz demanded alles
ance of Inde Husalo, But Imm Husain refused to bow to bin
for he was a vicons despot, liviog an uavbslamic life, All water
supply was stopped for Imim Hissin and bis camp from 7th
Mabaram and on the soth (toth October 680 A.D.) alt the
fallowers of Imima Husain and he himself were saughted and
Aled one by one after « Bight lating « few hours,

1 This tocy is foued with mioor diferences in the Tabegitt
Nash (CNA, p. 10), Fishes too mention i. TE, vol pe 59


SHAH NAMAH LABOURED , co § 108

mischievous guide the king ordered him to be kalled and
its body to be thrown on a bush of thorns.

898-900 Then addcessing the vetetan warriots and
men of experience His Majesty said:

“Today let us encamp hete at this very place and
all of us should jomtly smplore Go:
to ware might appear and the atmy which 1s suffeting
through wane of it might be saved’,

pechaps a way

901-903 Accordingly the army halted there that day.
‘And when thae unpleasant day closed, the desett was
transformed ito a vast expanse of darkness, The
outlook became dark like the feathers of a ctow and it
seemed that the whole world was plunged into pitch
darkness.

904-907 In the dead of aight the king then stood
up and ptayed earnestly to God to guide hin to a
path as well as eo water. So much did he implore the
Almighty God that from the direction of the Ka'ba there
appeared a light in pitch darkness. Seeing hae light the
king was amazed aud he considered ca sgn ot divine
favour.

908 gto He immediately summoned the atiny chiefs
and led che atmy in the direction of that light. After they
bad marched two milesy ariver came into sight, They
dashed forthwith and all drake water ¢o thetr fill,

g11-913 The tlurseafihcted army having quenched
their thirst proceeded further, and aleet marching one or
two miles found a road. That road Hits Majesty pursued
twotil he atrived 10 Ghazwi,

914 Verily whoever fixes his heart on God finds the
right path in both the worlds,

0 FUTOHU'S.SALATIN

Ancedote illustrating the virtues and landable
qualities of Mabmid

985-919 One mght Mahmid the chaste was lying
on a bejewelled throne, Lam told. In the course of that
fught he had no sleep at all and hus heart was distracted.
He said ro lumsel€ As far as Teemember, never before
was my heart so distracted, Pethaps 1 human hearc has
been affeted by me, pechaps a virruons soul has been
tortured by me, That ts why I am having no sleep,
two-thirds of the might has passed, The whole weld 1s
dark sn ey eyes.

920-922 After pondering deeply, he ordered that a
search be made at the gate ot the pslice and saul, ‘Perhaps
some ove-—man or woman—ts lurking about my palace 1
order to seek xedress. Being lim or her along so that
I might redress the grievance according to the best of my
judgment’,

923-925 According to the order the king's attendants
rushed bur they found no one about che royal palaces
Again the king sent them wich specific enseeuctions to
make a search about the palace a second rune loping. that
they might thus hight upon an afflicted person,

926.930 Tam told that the royal attendants who wete
the king’s confidants searched around rhe palace but they
found no one high oc low. However in a mosque hard
by they saw an old woman in prosteation, With her
forchead touching the ground and teats in her eyes she was
crying, *O lord! Give me justice agatnse Mahiniid, torment
tus soul with a fraerion of my gett",

938-934 When the royal courtiers saw the old woman
they said to hee, ‘The kang calls you", Wath a hundzed
tricks they took het to His Majesty, who ar the moment


SHAH NAMAH LABOURED 103

tus eyes fell on het was holding i his haads 2 cumblee of
water. He immediately attended to her problem saying:
‘Speak old woman, at whose hands have you
suffered and against whom are you raising this cry
and clamour?*,

935-941 The old woman sad, ‘O kang, 1 ts you
against whom I am raising the cry. I bad two sons, each a
youth and the pride of veterans, I have been told thar borh
‘of them have fallen prisoner tn the hands of the fire
worshippers at Kabul, Both of them ate lost to me during
the reign of a justice-dispensing King like you, Should
‘you, O talented king, make no endeavour to-day to. secure
release of my captive sons, tomorrow I would seize your
skirt and shed around you a river of teaes for, I fear, both
‘of my sons might die sn the prison of Kabul during your
eeign’.

947-945 On heating this the king said co hunselé :
A bundeed pities on my kingdom! Abt daring my reign
such a widow whose Life 1 bur a tale of sotrow should
perish through extreme disrtess and erying, che burning
cof her heart might being an tncenduary ro the land, IE
to morcow she seizes my skirt how shall I be able to acquit
myself and gratify dis woman.

946.950 Saying thus ro bumself—so at has reached me
frout wise uen—che kmg who was holding m ius bands 2
cumblecful of cold water imtendmg to drink the same, let
tt go from his hands, drinking not even a drop. And
while laying ir down from bis hands, fe made a resolve
saying: Ler cold water be forbidden to me unell I cedcess
the grievance of eis old woman.

951 ‘Ler the old woman goto her dwelling’ was rhe
coyal order then sstued,


104 FUTOHU S-SALATIN

952953 At sunnse, I am cold, the king beat the
im and mobilized Ins army. Resolved co redress the
grevance of hat old woman, he ser our hike wind from
Ghazat for Kabul.

954-956 Tam told thar he marched, aud afer a
period of six months he discovered a way to captunng the
foreress of Kabul When chat fortress was capeured ie put
the Magi to the sword and shed their blood elentlesly.
This done, he said, ‘Bang me all the prisoners *

957.958 Accordingly many of thote unfortunate
Persons from Ghazni aad Ghor—whom she fre-worshippers
of Kabul had eseried forcibly 1s prisonets—were led an
chains to the kang

959.963 From each and every individual che king
heard lus story. And, when the turn of the widow's sons.
fame, he recogatzed them by ther statement and showed
Kkindnesses and tavours to them, ordering that robes of
Vonoue with caps of dignity be given to them In regatd
fo the other prisoners, he ordered that their fetrers be
‘cut, and subsequently for the sake of those ewo youths
he granted gold wich garments to everyone and freed
them all,

964.972 The following day, the hing marched the
army eatly 1m che moruing from Kabul to Ghazni On
‘is arewal at Ghazni the whole ey wore a gay and beau
fal look And he was pleased to drive in cavaleade to the
house of the old woman There he called ler and gave
hier her two sonsy and stretching his hands to her foot he
‘21d, O lind mother, now that you are coinforted by the

§ Ghor was an obscure ponerpality Iytog 1m the mountains,
18 south east of Herat

SHAH NAMAH LABOURED 105.

sight of both ee youths, give me with your owa hands «
cup of eold watet! for ehiest has diluced my blood. For the
post six months Lhave only been taking lior water winch
bias affected my liver. God has enabled me ro save a
face before you and I am freed from worries.’

973-975 When the old woman saw the face of the
youths, she embraced them nost affectionately, invoked.
blessings on the king and clasped both of rhem—her young.
sons—to her bosom. Then, pratsing the king and showing
hhim respect, she gave im a tumblerful of eold water.

976 After the king ad taken water from the hands of
the old woman, he rode along with hs eouctiets to is palace.

977-979 Afterwaeds rhe righteous hing posted at the
gate of Ins palace an informer charging him co. stand there
and not to move under any circumstanre. Should a com-
plainant arrive, den he must immediately convey the news
to the royal eats.

980-981 Since that day, 1e became the peactice for the
kings in every country to have an informer posted at cheir
respective gates. Such a practice did not prevail befote; it 1s-
a legacy of that righteous king?

1 Cf. TeF.vol i, ps 62

2 More than three hundred yeurs before rhe birth of Mahmad
wid chat a coutrivance was made hy Noshiew5n of Trin ro
‘Keep Wimselt intormed about all the ancients thar tool place neat
the palaze and the county. He feared that an informer at the
palace, af appointed, might noc give free access to every aggrieved
Petion, He might even harass the larrer for reasons best known
tohim or might demand a rp. So.INoshirwin put up at the gate
of bis palace a chain which, ae the slightest jerk, rang inside the
palace; and immediately on heating ic Noshiowin rushed to redress
the grievance and administered justice.

Nigiaw'lMulk—Siyasat Namab, p. 27, Teberin 1310 H. Sh,


405 FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

982-984 To-day, more than three hundred yeats having
pasied since, thete is neither chat king not that wooran
-only ehat stoty has remained in bistory to ammortalize that
king. If you, too, perform such a noble deed to-day, you
will like Mahmad bear the emblem of success to-nartaw.

Three things wnsbed by Sultin Mabmid—May
God bless his tomb—and bis obtaining all shose three
things.

985-990 I have heard from the old Iustocy tellets that
Mahead, the renowned king, often prayed to the Aloughty
God co make clese to lum three things: ftst le—king of
holy faith—should know whether he 1s definitely the son
‘of Sububeigins secondly whether he—pride of all the kings
on leaving eis world, would be raised co patadise of
-ehrown toto hell; and elvtdly whether he would bebold che
Propliet in a dream, For a decade he kept wotrying might
and day so tat these three hungs should become cleat
0 lun.

991-994 After che lapse of twelve yeats, 1 so hap:
pened, that one evenng che bearer brought a candle a
golden staud neo the royal chamber at ¢ late hour, while the
ing was siting, He enquured of the bearet saylug, *Why
hhave you come at so ate an hour, bearer?

995-1000 The beater bowed and said, *Your Majesty’
Twas walking towaeds the palace wich his buraing candle
am my hands, When I artived near the toyal chambet, a
jurist said to me, +O candle-bearer of che generous king’,
Uadjure you by the Almighty Lord of the Great Throne,
place this candle with he golden stand for a whe before
fre for I muse needs look to co-day’s lesson. As soon a
the dificulty about my lesson as removed, you take the
candle to His Mayesty',


SHAH NAMAH LABOURED 107

1001-1003 Since chat esteemed man of learning had
adjured me by the name of God I did not disccgard hus
request. Tsaid, ‘Come along, whatever you want t0 see,
sec’, For this reason, O generous king, 1 was delayed in
bringing the candle’.

1004 1008 On hearing this His Majesty. said, *Take
the candle to that learned man of religion and tell him, ‘O
man of enlightened mind, the king has granted you this
candle together with the golden stand. Take the candle
and dispose of the stand as you like, since st 1s now a toyal
gift made to you.’ To you also, O candle bearer, I bereby
grant freedom, since you have enabled me to petfotm this
God pleasing service.”

1009 1014 When His Majesty had made such a gife
an the name of God, he beheld the lioly Prophet in a dream
the following night. The Prophet Mustall said to him,
“O regnane king, undoubtedly you ace the son of Subuke-
glu. You deserve paradise as well asa kingdom at one
and the same time, You have given such suppott to my
Shavit that you have earned for yourself both the worlds,
Have no apprehensions lenceforth. God 1s your helper,

Descuny and faith are supporters of your cause’!

1015 1016 Verily, whoever lights the candle of
gencrosity will be enlightened with the mysteries of
Destiny. God will geant fim acquaintance with Himeelé
and through Hom will illuminate the ages. -

+ ‘Ieam’s picturesque language may be consutent with the
‘saditonsl Muslin prate for Sultan Mabmud, but history. knows
aothung about the eause 10 dear to “Isims, namdy Prophet Mohave
ad's apprecianon of Sultia Mobmid The whole story a9 1€
stands .s chumerical ia the eyes of a modern historian

203 FUTOHU'SSALATIN

Sulten Mabmitd arrtves thirsty sm 6 gerden and
takes pomegranate yusce from the bands of an old
woman
1017-1025 One day, Tam cold, the king roe ona

Worse ito a desert antending to hrune. In the course of

fis hoot ranging over a few parasangs, le steipped mioust-

tain and desert of che wild animals Then 3 deer sprang
before bim, snd immediately on seeang at he Lefe his troops
and guards fats pursue he galloped tus horse with hon
ike boldness He galloped long, chew made a dash and at
last secured that game in this manner. On drawing, close

to the deer he pulled sn artow from Ins quiver and slot 3.

1m che buttocks so effecavely that it pretced the dect's

lead through and then affixed self into the ground.

Thereupon ie dismounted from the horse and slaughnered

the game citmg the name of Gad. This done, he wile

drew and rode back co lus own camp.

1026-1029 But he rode so quickly that he lose bis
way, and both he and hts horse were completely exhausced
through hard galloping. Thereupon he curned rowards
the city, sull deving the horse briskly. He was s0 chirny.
thar the royal blood was diluted an that hunting Beld.

1030 1034 At last, he arrived in a garden at whose
gate he saw an old woman sitriag. He said to ber,‘
kind mother, pour one dkop of water down my throat
Save me quickly, O reverened mother, for my blood 1s be
img through thirst, The woman replied, *Your Majesty.
watta while for Lam bringing you a plessaoe sherbet of

pomegranate juice and shall save you from his buen
iowe

1035-1038 Saying. chs she ran soto the garden and
brought 2 pomegemare. Then crushing it into a bow!

SHAH NAMAH LABOURED 109

which became full to the brim with che juice, she invoked
blessings and delivered the same into the King’s hands.
The thirsty king quaffed it in one draught, and recuened
the bow! saying, ‘Being one more soon!

1039-1043 The old woman took the bowl from the
king's lands and went into the garden quickly. As she
withdrew from the royal presence the king said to
umself, 1 wish Thad a gatden of ehns type of pomegrana-
tes ytelding such boney-like juice as this, In = nutshell
she again brought 2 pomegtanate which she crushed into
2 cup; but half the cup remained empty.

1044-1045 Seeing this the king felt amazed; suill he
took the juice for rt was pure. Again he said, ‘Bring me
ius delicious juice once mote.’

1046-1049 This time again only half the cup was
filled. The king, though amazed, quaffed t, Then he
said t0 the old woman, keeper of that gatden, “With the
juice of the succeeding two fresh pomegranates the cup
did not fill 2s st had been filled by the fist one, What

is the reason? Tell me, O brave woman, the fact of
che matter,

1050-1051 ‘Your Majesty’, replied the old woman,
‘certainly the governor of this area has become covetous
‘of the peasants’ garden. For thus reason the pomegranate
juice has. diminished’,

1052-1053 When the king heard this, he felt ashamed
and ssid: +O simple-mmded woman, being another pome-
sgeanate from the garden. Crush ie and give the juice
toto my hands’.

_ 109-1059 As she withdrew into the garden che
king moaned before the Almighty God; and placing his
head on the earth with a hundred apologies, he safd in

a0 FUTOHU'S SALATIN

utter helplessness, «O Knower of secrers and hidden things,
Oaceeprer of apologies from the needy, whereas Tam
penitent accept my apology, withhold not Thy generosity
froin (my) subjects on account of my sin As long as
my soul 1s atached to my body and as long as my heart 1s
associated with intellect, I shall never again cast 2 covetous
eye on che assets of the peasants in this county"

1060-1062 Now the king being a penitent, the old
woman brought a fresh pomegeanate from the garden and
ctushed it sto the cup which became full to the brim as,
had been the case inthe firse instance, Then she gave
ttto the king who drank st with 2 hundred thanks,

1063-1065 Afterwards, Iam told His Majesty rode
speedily into the cnty, never again did he ever cover the
assets of the peasants By virtue of Ins justice his dominions
looked like a gatden, bully tracts and plains being trans
forined into villages and eities.

1066-1068 Associates of the convivial party picked
‘up cheerfolly to tus memory the cup of revival every
morning. Comte, O cup bearer, and in his inemory gwe
te alto immediately» Ifetengthening sherbet. Revive
ime under my agonizing thirst in che same way as Mahmid
‘was revived under the effect of the fresls pomegranate juice.

Anecdote of « sparrow's nest and the threshold of Mabmud,
hing of Ghezni, May Allah sllammate bis tomb!
1069-1071 An ola village headman narrared to me

thar that enlightened king had once led rhe troops «©

capture a fortress and continued besieging st for period
of sex months, When in the course of he sixth month

44 was caprured, he rumpeted his retreat,

1072-1073 When the royal sweeper set about

SHAH NAMAH LABOURED ua

dismantling the camp, he noticed that a little sparrow had
buile its nest in the king’s tent.

1074-1075 In that nest he saw a few eggs and
stopped his work, He came down quickly from the top of
the tent and reported the matter to the king,

1076-1078 When the king came to know of it he
stayed on and temained there until the raw eggs became
ripe and were hatehed and the young ones had winged
and flown away. Then the king prepated to start from
that place,

1079 He led the troops and arrived in the frontiee
outpost of Ghazni and the height of his banners reached
the stars,

robo Such behaviour on the part of that king of

enlightened mind was graceful. He was indeed a helper
of the weal and the feeble.

Mabmitd, king of Ghezni—may God sllaminate
bis eminence duquetified from saying prayers at the
prinerpal mosque and 4 torrent of water streams
forth before bim,

1081-1089 {am told that the ralented Mahmiid who
was one of the seleet men of God was preparing, one
Friday, to say prayers in the principal mosque, In that
state his ablution became invalid and he became dejected.
He said co himself:

For the sake of performing an ablution, if 1
withdraw from amidst thus congregation of devotees,
1 shall have to go quickly out of the mosque; in that
case 1 would be puc one of conntenance and dismayed,
People would say thar Mabmad was swayed by a
demon for he beeame polloted in the mosque while:


an FUTOHU'S SLATIN

axtending the Friday prayer, He has deviated from the

custom of wise men If T make an ablunon here in

the mosque men of wudom will turn thet faces

agaust me Should I yoin che prayer without making

an ablation, che Almighty creator would see me

rage 1093 While His Mayesty was thus perplered,
-thete streamed forth before tum through the omnipotence
cof the Creator — the cherisher of the universe — 2 torrent
fof water tn which be made ablutions, Then he performed
payer in congeegation and afterwards eame back home,
texetating moumbetable thanks to God who enabled lum 19
iat erties! moment to save Ins face

1094 Thu story that God honoured fim with 2
steeam of genetonity became public

1095 1 have liered ftom globe rromtets chat the satd
roteend! sill Flows in that mosque?

+ Eveo sf the “plobe wotcen” pave correct information #2
“teams cegacding. the contiausnee of the torrent, no such ding

2 There ts no rice ofthis mosque now But‘Utht whe wat
a ontempocary water tells ws tha 1¢ wat an extremely spatout
smongue of huge suze and pillars The Sultan had spent 0 much
wealth on chats walls shone giving. the impression that they
‘were made of gold and precious ments By virtue of st vanegated
colours this moxque looked hnghter thas the colourt of 2 abow
The marble used for Booting shone giving dazzling ight And
-materuls ured for building x were brought From dierent countries

‘Arcached to thes morgue wat a bug school sn which were exught
ferent branches of learwog hy datinguuthed teachers Te
possessed big rooms with lefty roofs un which mere heaped valuable
“Douks about all the sciences past and present ‘These books were
studied by dasunguushed wnters and profesors

Toside the mosque the Suan had encstrocted x cubse. chamber
which was intended for hisemn wie Ke was decorated with gold,


SHAH NAMAH LABOURED 13

Five stances of Hasan Marmandi’s wrong counsel which
brought shame to Sultan Mabmiid Ghizi—may God en-
lighten bis evidence —and theSultan's complaint about thes
1096-1144 One day towards the elose of his reign
Mahmad, the righteous, summoned the talented Hasan
‘Matmandi, bis mimster, and satd to fim
‘During my reign you have been the netve-tentre
of administration, O Hasan. As Jong as che global
sky exuts, uo minister of sound judgment like you
will anise, You have always gwen me good advice,
Through your advice I captured north and south; and.
though good fortune and strength of wisdom you
faltered not, but five eames. Firstly, you faltered
when the king of Kabul¥ having fallen prisoner into
my hands, you advised that he should be sent to the
market and sold. From such a poor advice, O adviser,
came contempt of my forefathersand ancestors. Secondly
when the king of Ghor had cast out of his head the

marble and enamelled work and wos embelluhed with a EZ
sade of shining gold In front of this chamber was constr.cced
a ball im which prayers were performed tn roms by bus sleves,
sumbertag about 3,009
Leading into chis chamber was 2 private passage coscect
swith the Sultin's palace Tt was intended for
that he could peep im and go out wnbour asyeze co
“Ucbi—Tenkh-r Yarns, pp, 4ogrgus, eat exer:
Detbs College, 1857. .
Bering bis account on the above nazzcre ef Ur, Fan
refs. Finches says
that the amimayd of Chases was a? Urien Feld Quenste
bride of the shy) which the seerzaact ete the wn, THF
vol tp st ae
¥ Gf footnote 2, p. Bs sapez,
e


ng

FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

sdea of war and had come submisswely to my court,
you made me sit on the golden thtone. Then standing,
up like a bride-dresser, you adorned me with the crown
and royal robe You called in the king of Ghor who,
clad un simple clothes, came to that court in a manly
fashion, You installed him on a kingly chatt. When after
kkusing my feet, he sar on a chair I felt so piqued that
Tebought Iwas ike a beide on the eitone while chat
lucky ling was sitting on a chat confronting me,
Thirdly, when an old woman presented me a piece of
cloth beating 2 complete picture of my royal insignia,
you said to me, “O triumphant king, order that the
cloth be taken co a broker and tenfold of the peice
fixed by um, be paid to her.” At last, when ee old
woman came to know the ugliness of the eontents
of my ordet she was disappointed, Then she said
mockingly, ‘Thus cloth I presented with the object of
and according to the custom of petforining a niin.
Now, it would have been beteer sft were retumed to
me, tt was not to be assessed for sale.” She satd this
and took away the cloth from me I heard that she
gave it to the ealots who made out of at ladies" socks
twymediately. Wearing those socks embroidered from
end to end with my insignia, she walked che market
the whole day. Since then, she has never tumied up
at_my palace Thus my snsignia was highly insuleed.
Fourthly, on a certain day, O man of experience, when
1 was retumung from hunting in the feld and night
hhad suddenly set tn, wrapping the world in darkness
[and you reached a garden wherein lived a dervish.
T said co you that we mghe stop here for the mght and
Put up in the but of the dervish You said that tt
would not become a king to lodce sms heooar’e hur,


SHAH NAMAH LABCURED 5

Having so far rately set_my face against your counsel
dashed an inadvertence towards the ety. At day-break,
that man of enlightened mind who had been in that
hut came to my palace during dutbar ume, He
greeted me and wished me well Then he complained
saying, “© king of auspicious descent, had you kindly
rested in my hut last night, in no way would your
wisdom and judgment have been impatred. Rather
the wonh of a dervish would have risen high to the
sky by virtue of your stopping tliere ”

‘Saying thus he walked away while I became
dtspirted and felt ashamed, Much did I endeavour
so that I might make redress and rebuke you in his
ptesence, But on no account did that man of world
wide experience heed my request. Fifthly, O wie
man when Firdausi the preturesque composer, presented
the Shih Namah and desired Ray a3 tecompense you
did not let me give the saine to fim At thot time
you gave me an inapproprrate counsel to the effect that
an elephant load of silver be given to him instead.
By following your counsel I erred The poct’s heart
was aggneved by che said present He boughe some
ale in exchange for that present of mine which he
despised. As long as rhe world lasts 1 shall be put co
shame in every country on account of that unbappy
counsel of yours’

1145-1151 When from Mabmid the country
conqueror Hasan’ heard this story through, he invoked
blessings on him and pratsed lum “Thea he satd

4 Ahmad bin Hasan aleMaunands was, sn the words of “Usb,
a bailiant maa of experience a

perience 2 luminary among lis contemporaries
and equals, lnghly efferent 1n compontton, and arithmetic, and cons-
prcuous for his intelligence and correctness of views as well as for.

FUTOHU'S-SLATIN

°O Jord, to ctr us human ; sometimes ripe men
falter into giving unnpe counsel No one has been
anfallble all through one's Ife z nor does wind always
brings rain of pute peatls. For ehis sin of mine I may
not be held responsible since my counsel would out-
weigh my fault, A wise man docs not want to falter
tm any case and at any time, Should God’s ordatnment
sive an opposite ruling he would be helpless’.

1152-1154 When the king heard ehis from Hasan
hhe accepted his explanation on the spot and said, ‘Since
your rectitude outweighs your mustake I hereby fotgwe all
yout faults, O man of good repute’,

1155-1156 In the course of that day the minister
and the ruler, Tain told, had mutual confidence restored,
At long last both died and catried with chem their tights
and wrongs,

‘us slll tothe eealization of taxes There was none amongst young
‘men of his type s0 resourceful, setve, energenie, wise and gifted
‘wath rch imagination and planning Fis father Hasan Matmand,
swat alioa man of portsand had been made revenue collector of
Bust by Subukugla But he was charged with misappropnation aod
put to death by the latte,

The 109 Abmad or Abul Qismn Ahmad bia Hatao al
Mamndi was closely connected with Sulsia Mahmud, being. his
foster brotber as well asus class fellow Both were brought up
‘together and recewed common lesions st sci!

On ascending the throne of Ghazat Mahmud lavished favours
(09 Aboud bro Hiasinaf-Maimands and raued im to four brgh
‘offices in succession, namely accountant-genctal (mastené mull),
bead of the war deparrment (sabubs dawan + ‘ere) tax collector
(Cam of the province of Bust and finally ware,

‘The dottes ofthe lst office, namely wnzarst being most ssksome
be easned great reputation by discharging them im an excellent
‘manner The Sultin was bighly ampresied by Ins wazue's superb


SHAH NAMAH LABOURED 7

1157 May God grant salvation co both since both
were always devoted to justice and equity.

Brief account of the desth Mabmid s Subukngin
and of the accession of bis son Mubammad + Mabmird
and of Mabmitd s descendents , may Allab enlighten
bus tomb!

1158 1159 When the victorious Mahmid found tha
the world liad come completely under his eoutrot he busied
himself, mght and day, an offering thanks to the Almighty
God.

11Go-1262 In the yea! 421, the ehirty-sixth year
of lus ceign, che eapttal was bereft of him for he journeyed
from this mortat world co the world of etermty.

qualiues and exttaordinary abilities meludh ig is pat onage of
learning and deep knowledge of Arabre wluch the preceding wazit
‘Abu'l ‘Abbis Fazl bin Ahmad had lacked, For this reaton the
lntter had dispelled Arabic from the status it hal enjoyed lneretofore
tn the State, being the only veluele of all offical correspondence,
Now, Aheud bin Hassn al-Maimandi restored Atabic to its
‘oniginal status and ordered that all offienl coctespondence must be
‘earred on tn Arabie snatead of Petstan

However, as luck would have xt his remarkable success an the
Asscharge of his dunes awakened the eslousy of his rivals and they
backbited bun to Sulyan Mahmid, The Suleén dismissed bint
from the office of wane after he had filled wt over 2 decade
(a013-1024/ 404-415) and sent him a prsouer into the fort
of Kaligyse im the southern Kashour Inll, There he lingered
under the charge of one Jangh. # mulitary offcer, until the death
of Sulan Mahoud In 103+/422 Sultan May'ud released him
snd appointed him as hus ows wazie But this slated waz died
the following year (132/424), leaving belund 3 good nate
and reputation Seet

(2) Urb —Tatshb 1 Yame a, 340 Dehbs, 1847.
Bete PP 339°34' 47,

1 ap, 1030


18 FUTOHU'SSALATIN

1163-1169 Verily whoever comes nto this world
such is Ins end at last, However, death 1s more delightful
than hfe 10 anyone who has luckily sown the seed of good
ness an this farm, He enjoys ebe frutts from the garden
of happiness. His departure from this antique earth it
ike going from 2 prison into a gatden, His venerable
body 1s merged completely into duse and his lofty soul
‘mimes with tne birds of paradise morning and evening,
moving Ike an orchard bird, Jet out from 2 cage. His
feup-beater 1s hour and hus drupe the water of paradise $
and angels are lus compantons an that abode of joy.

11701172 As for myself, I am hike a drunkard 5 and
to cherish the memory of my fesends in that garden I s3y
every mioinent, ‘Come O cup beater, and give me a soule
Pleazng cup one of the goblet of mystery, making me #0
tntoxicated ehiat I inight leap out of this garden and take
‘my abode in the other orehard.”

1173-1177 When Mahmad departed chis world, he
lefe belund six sons in thus caravan, One of those six was
Abdur Rashid, 2 ptinee of lucky stats ; second and third
were Ibrahim and Ismail, both conspicuously wise ; fourth
wat Naser Mahmdd ; fifth was Masrad Shih and sixth
was Sulsin Muhimmad whom fortune mstalled on the
throne after the death of bis father,

COMMENTARY

When m 961/350 *Abdo'l Malik bin Nah, fife kang
of the Simint laingdom of Bokhic3 which comprised
‘Tramsoana, Khorisin and she Helmund and Kabu! valleys
shed, leaving belund a tender son Abu'l Mansi, Alptgin
the Turkish slave of Abdu'l Mahk bin Nah Simdat and


SHAH NAMAH LABOURED 19

governor of Khurisin, became restive, Abu'l Mansir
reconciled himself with this rebelhous governor and recog~
nized Inm as an independent ruler of Ghazni,

Aleee the death of Alpugia in 963/352 Ghazni passed
under the rule of he slave and general, Pitiugin the tyrant.
During bus reign the Hinds government of Kabul which
had been viewing wath yealousy the rise of the upstart
power of Ghazni made a muibtary demonstration on the
frontiers of Ghaznt, Bur the demonsttators wete driven
back by the joint forces of Preingin and Subuktigin who
‘was another slave and general of Alptigin. However, 1 was
believed chat wietory rested with Subuktigin alone, and the
Turkish amurs installed fm on the throne of Ghazot to the
exclusion of Pisiugin whom they deposed.

Born in 942/334 at Jig, a minor ptincipality of,
Totkastin, Subukrigin was eaken by some Turkish ratders
to Bokhies and sold co Abi Nast, a merchant, who
presented him to Alprigin Alpigin gave him the band of
Is daughter 1n mattiage. In due course Subuktigin ascended
the throne of Ghaznf, During lus reign began that tertt-
torial expansion of Ghazni on the borderland of India which,
provoked the Hindushiluya kingdom of Lamaghin, Kabul
and the iver Chinab nto creating a conflagtanon. Since
this kingdom sptead up to Mulia and Poonch and claimed
‘Wathind in southern Kashmir as ats capital Raya Japil of
Warlund resolved to stop the expansion of Ghazni, Thus
he he the flames ofa war which consumed the Hidd-
sh3hiya kingdom, The whole of this kingdom was, asa
consequence, annexed to the empire of Ghazni,

Ics sad chat Jaupil lad pared a raid which Subukt-
gin had-made by making a miliary demonstration on the
frontier of Ghazni, Subukegin gave lum batile eat the

130 FUTUHU'S-SALATIN

Ghuzak bull! and then made peace, accepung a large
indemnity. When, on returning to hus eapnal Wathind,
Jupil refused to pay che mdemmnity and maltceared the
amis of Ghazni who had been sent to collect the indemnity
Subuhtn,in invaded the Hindishihiya kingdom and
annexed some territory an the Helmund valley up to
Lamaghin, JaipSl retaliated by tovading Ghazni with a
hhuge army, colleered from all over Hindustin, The
Khaljs and Afghans who inhabreed this region henceforth

manned the army of Ghazni,

Mhotd who had seen duemg lus father's lifetime the
outbreak of this war cook up the gauntlet and marched
‘upon India in 999/389.

The first svasion which rook place en September 1000/
Sbawwil, 390 wss diceeted against che fronuer forts of the
Khyber Pass, Te wat but an attempt at pronging and
reconnonrimg, For the second savasion which eulmmated
1m the battle of Peshawar both parties were well prepareds
Marching fom Ghent with an army of 15,000 cavalry
‘and numerous eamp followers un September root (Shewuil,
391) Mahmid found Jaspal alceady established in 2 plain ,
near Peshawar with a much larger army the strengih of
whch is put at 12 000 horse, 30,000 foot and 300 wate
slephamis In the battle that ensued on azth November,
t008/81h Muberram, 392 Mahmid dispersed them all
Japil wil some of tis sons and grandsons was taken
peuioner,

‘The tind wwvasion was duected agamst Bhaninds
(Bhavy a4) whose Raja Bayi Rie by name had been friendly

§ Thi Intl st20d between Ghazal and Lamaghan, MG. p. 296
U agree with Or Nam (MG 300) that “he apeeul
woes of modern tunortany ia adenufying Bhatiys with Blea,


SHAH NAMAH LABOURED. ae

Bue he disappointed Makynid when the
war with Jaipal needed his help. So, with
the intention of conquering Bhaunda Mamid started
from Ghazni in October 1004/ Dhilbijja, 394. A battle
was fought near Bhatinda, Bajt Rit was completely defeated
and ultimately committed suicide, On his return to Ghazni
Mahewid matched chrough che rereitory of Abul Fach
Di'od Lawi of Mulin, Di'id tried ro block Ins passage.
The Indus too was in fury. Bur the Sulgin came back safely
to Ghiznf cowards the close of May 1005/Rajab, 395+

The fourth snvasion aimed at the conquest of Multia.
Smee Abu'l Fath Di'id had allied himself with Baji Rit
of Bhatinda and eried to block Mahmid’s passage the latter
tesolved to destcoy his power. Seating from Gheznt wt
March 1006/Jumads Il, 396he crossed che Indus near
Peshawar and then laid siege co Mulia, Da'dd sued for
peace, The Sulgia imposed tard conditions including =
Promuse to relinquish Is Carmatizn (Qerdrmte) creed.
Afterwards he returned to Ghazni, entrusting the task of
subduing the adjoining gares of Muga to Sukipal} (aow
Nawasa Shit, grandson of Jatpal of Watlund),

The fifth invasion aimed at crushing the rebellion of
Shah to whom the coutrol of the adjoimng parts

and Uchb ate wide of the mark and that tbe only place
of umportance which can eeally be identifcld with it is Bhstinds
which has always been famous for sts ampregnsbilty. Te commanded
the route into the Gangetic valley and it was necessary for Mabmad
to reduce ic, :

+ Left as a hostage at Ghazot by hit grandfather Jsipil,
Sokbpal embraced Ilim and was called Nawiss Shih in view of
the fact thet he was grandson of Jaipal of the famous Hindashahiya.
Synasty.

aa FUTUHU'S SALATIN

‘of Mulgin had been enttusted by Mahmid. Nawasa Shih
‘sow apostatied and appeats to have joined hands with
Abu'l Fath Di’ud who was still ac large. At that time
Sulyin Mahaid was grappling with his own fathertn-law
Usk Khan, euler of Kashghar, having dispossessed him of
Khurisdn, pars of which he had unlawfully setzed , and
‘Mahmad was pursuing im an ehe ditection of the Oxus.
But on hearing of the rebellion of Niwisa Shalt the Sutin
felinguished the pursuit, and crossing the Indus 1m che
winter of r007/Rebi 398 he appeared befote Multin.
‘There the inflicted a defeat on Nawiss Shih who fled
cowards the Sale Range.

‘The sixth wnaston was directed against the Hindi
confederacy which was now formed st the insigation of
Avandpil a grandson of Jaupil of Watlind, Te ts said thet
the rajas of Uyatny Gwalior, Rilinyar, Kanauy, Debit and
Aymer had joined hands sn elite attempt to anvade Ghent
and destroy st, To prevent this catastrophe © Mahmid
marched out of Ghsznt in December 1008/Rebi Us 399+
‘On teaching the plain of Wathind across the Indus he
encountered the Hind alles 1 a battle and defeated
ahem all, They fled away.

‘The seventh savasion which resulted sn the capture of
Nigarkot was 2 concomitant of the sixth. From Wathind
the vieror proceeded ro the forr of Nagarket, It was
captured aleer a siege of three days, Mshmad then
‘entrusted the administration of che fort ro a trusted ani
aed Iumself marched with his army on Nariyanpur, now
Alwar, The raja offered restsance bur was defeated and
‘Noriyanpir was captured.

‘The eighth invasion was directed against Mulsia
‘because Abu'l Fath Ds'ad had intensified Ins hostlry.

SHAH NAMAH LABOURED 133

‘Mahmid reached Mulein an the winter of roxo/Jumada Il,
gor. David was defeared and captured. He was sent 4
pruoner to Ghiznt and then to an obscure fort neat
Qundahat where he died

The mith invasion was ducected agamst Thinesvt.
Mahovid marched out of Ghazni in October 1012/Rabs I,
403+ antent on crushing the Hindi confederacy which was
being formed to protect Thanesar. The only pirched
batde that rook place an the course of this invasion was
neat the river Sutley where a raja known as Rim who
offered opposition to Mahmid was defeated. Mahmid
thea obtained great booty aud recucoed ta Ghaznf,

In the course of the tenth invasion that followed 1m
1014/405 Sultin Mzhmid marched against the fortress
of Nandana in the Salt Rae which commanded the
main route into dle Gangetic Doab and was held by
Tullochonpal, the raja of Lihor. Unaided, Trilochanpal,
could nor resist Mahmid. So, enteutting the defence
of bis tersttoty to Ins son Bhimpil Teilochanpal swept
to Kashinit, seeking help from Sangeamataja, the
ruler of Kashinie. But before any such help could come
Mabmid captured che fortress of Nandana, Then he
defeated Trilochanpil ma fight near the civer JIhelum,
Afterwards the victor placed Nandana under the charge
ofa trusted amir and returned to Ghvzoi,

The eleventh invasion (1015/406) was dicected against
Kashmic whose ruler Sangtamaraja was held guilty for
helping Trilochanpal of Nandana and Lahor. Perhaps
‘Mahmid wanted m dus manner to conquer Kashinic,
But he fatled and returned to Ghazni.

The twelfth invasion was an attempt ro penertate into
the Ganges valley. He started from Ghazni in October
1018 /lumide Ul, 409. And passing through the Panjab


14 FUTUHU S-SALATIN

the enteted che valley of the Jamuna, chus couching Debi
which did not atecace him. Then he arrived in Baran,
modem Bulandshahr, and afrer receiving formal sub-
mission of ts governor Harn Datta the victot proceeded
s Mabiban so the district of Muetra, ehen co Muttra
ttsclt and finally to Kanayy (r019/410)- All these places
were casily subjugated Then were captured the neighbout
tng forts of Mun, Asstand Sharwa, and loaded with booty,
‘Mahmid returned to Ghazni.

The thirteenth invasion was ditected against Kalinjat
since Nanda the raya of Kalinyst! had headed a hostile
confedetacy of rsjat fotmed with the object of punuslung
Rayapal, caja of Kanauy, who bad submitted to Mahmide
In fact, chey killed Rayyapal. To avenge eis mucdet
and to punish Nanda and if@ accomplices Mahmtd_statted
froin Ghient in the winter of rorg/qi0. Crossing all
the ewvers successively chae came in the way aud matching.
fearlessly theough lull and dale he fell upon each member
of che confederacy 1u turn and defeated him.

In the course of the fourteenth invasion Mahmid bent
his steps towards Lahor whose raja Trilochanpil bad
obstructed the progress of the army of Mahmii in the
‘course of his expedition againsr Kaliyar, Now Talochaupil
was dead. So Maha ad rnflicted a defeat on hus son Bins
pil (x021/4¢2). Bhimnpil fled co Ajmer where he died
(1026/4126) By virwe of thus victory the whole of Panjab
became patt of the empire of Gh:

The fifteenth snvasion was diected against Kilwpat
and Gwalior, Nanda the eaja of Kilinjar was soll unsubs
dued and was highly erucolene. In roza/4e3 Sulla

1 MG. p 114 Burs appears from other sources that the
‘name of the ruler of Kahnyee was Vadysdhara Chendela

SHAH NAMAH LABOURED 135

Mahmid marched to Kalinjar. But Gwalior being a
powerful feudatory of Kalinyar the Sulgin stormed the fort
of Gwalior which lay on the way. Raya Arjan of Gwalior
sued for peace. The Sulsin then advanced to Kalinyar which,
was captured, and the raja having made submission to the
satisfaction of Mahmid the latter retired (1023/413).

The target of the srxteenth invasion was Somnath in
Katlnawar. Somaith (literally moonlord was the name
of that great idol wluch was eapable according to Hinda
belief of destroying Mahmid. Now Mshmid resolved
tm tum to destroy it, Seatting from Ghsznt in October
1025 /Sbi'bin, 416 he artived at Multin in the following,
month, Then he proceeded to Annhilwira which he
captured without encountering any resistance (December
1025 /Shewwal, 416) Afterwards, he advanced to Somnith,
deferting en route a huge army of the devotees of Somnith
(6 Jannary 1026/14 Dbulg'ede, 416) and laid siege to the
fore of Somnath The following day (7th January 1026/15,
Dhlg'ads, 416) began a momentous fight which was over
1 the course of a few hours, Mshmiid acquiring the upper
hand, Two days of hard fighting were yer to follow
before lhe enjoyed final victory. Then he entered the
temple and acquited untold wealth.

The seventeenth invasion was intended to punish the
Jats of the Salt Range who had defied Mahmid and
molested bis army on hs return from Somnath, On seeing.
the army of Mahmid approaching (March 1027/Muberram
418) the Jats took refuge am some of the islrnds of the
Indus Mshmid pursued them with Ins fleet of armed
boats and a naval battle was fought, the Jats having pur
into action their own machine of maritime war But they
were defeated and lost to Mahm@d all chose islands which
had hitherto been their atrancheld..


CHAPTER V

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (I)
FALL OF GHAZNI AND RISE OF GHOR
Verses 1178-1951

Accession of Mubsmmad bin Mabmid-i Subuksigin
and bis descendants—may Allab sanctify their remains and
make paradise theit abodel

1178-1182 When Mabmid departed from this world,
all the grandes of the Srate came together. Mas'ad
hheing in ‘eiq, all agreed that Mubammad should succeed
to the throne of his father. The following day all the
army chiefs rose at the sounding of drums and decorated a
throne with turquoises. On that ehrone they installed the

ptince and all pataded as loyalists before him.

1183-1190 After Muhammad had mounted the thtene
of Mahmad the news of this event teached Mas‘id, He
matched from ‘Ieiq with such a huge atmy that the nine
skies wee lost in ics dust. He artived angeily at the ou
posts of Ghazni, And when the inbsbittees of Ghaznt
Iheatd of this, a mecting was held by the army chiefs and
measures were concetted in secret. They said tm one
anothers! ‘Mas'td will make a beter king, Although
Mubhimmad is the son of Mahmdd we do cet seo in him
‘an aptitude for justice and equity, Jc is bertce that we
remeve him from the Seate and drive him 92 place of
contentment, We must apply a bc ica wo his eyes
without delay and raise Masti to the rhezce’

rigt-1194 By miking sock 3 ely
army chiefs matred their oxo repecizs fersanes. Then
they sent a messenger sersdy oo de
‘We ae all your welbrittass 2! az Leaking forward ©
your coming, Come quidly sst8sz we may hand oF
‘0 you the kingdoms ef Genz anf see the royal exo
your head’,

9 Bs

ae TUTOHU'S SALATIN

1195 When this message reached Mas ud, he led his
tcoops speedily fo Ghazni

Army ebrefs aupply ¢ bot ston to the eyes of
Mubammed Shab thn Mabmiid Shab and smprison bim and
they give the crown and throne to Mastad

1196 1203 When Mas‘id’s army arrived neat Gheznit
the selfsame perverse chieftains of the capital applied
hot son to the eyes of Muhammad and imprisoned
kum without encountering any opposition, Then they
came out of Ghszni as well wishers of the headstrong
Masiad. They rook to lum che crown and royal tobe
together with presents, msert and eribute, and performed
pabost because he was the defacto son of (Mahmid) the
king of the world. Then they set the erown on bis heod
and everyone immediately swore allegiance to him They
seattered abundant jewels by way of nisdr on his head,
placed these heads on the ground and then stood to the
lefe snd right.

1204-1305 Alter seven months had elapsed since the
death of Mahindd and his son Mas‘id *s enthronement, he
recewed the title of Nasiru'ddin for he was a generous kang,
‘of Kian descent.

1206-1211 During Ins reign, [ am told, the Ssljuqs*

1 Nur Querlly seatering, strewiog) signifies anything which
1s scattered and strewn out of regacd and love for another person

2 Literally kusing the foot.

3. Kiyen was the surname of the second ruling dyossty 19
ple-Isame leis Kiyans ss an adjective from hiyén

4. Sshuqi—so called after the mame of their ancestor Saljuq,
bin Dagiq, 2 Tuskoran chueftam of Turkistin—wete a nomadic
tribe of infidel Tucks who had their abode in the Kurghie steppes
tll che tenth century A,D (fourth eentury Huts) In ee latter

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 3

wich a large army stormed Ghazni three times, bur. they
were defeated on all three oceastons by hus army, Their
fourth invasion was followed by a ehree-day pitched battle
berween the two armies. On the fourth day, Mastid
suffered defeat and fled c© Ghazat and the whole of his
camp fell to the hands of ehe enemy,

3212-1213 That same year he left Ghyzot and set
out on a military expedition for Hindustin, Meanwhile,
he pheed Ghazni? under the care of lus son Maudid.

part of the tenth century Saluq moved with hit elso from the
steppes into the Muslim tercrory of Jandln Bukbard which was
then ruled by the Semaat Tusks Pressed! by efcumatances and
ta the hope of imptoving their prospects through the putiuie of
‘wat Sayuq and hus enbesmen embraced Hem Before tong, they
captuted the heyposts inthe government and stmy of Duhbard
and won fot theie Samaoi ruler some victories, frustrating his
caval and eoemy lak Turkoman, ruler of Balasaghun an obscure
terntory ia che steppes They also esme tnto confiet with
Mhmud of Ghznt who defeated them im Transoxana After~
‘wats they angratated themselves wnh him and were allowed 12
setde in Khorasan They consolidated thee positon thete, aod
witha a decade after the death of Mahmud they setzed the whole
of Khorasan

“Towards the close of his cexgn Mas'ad opened a erussde against
them ‘Three tumes he scatrered their forces 1n the neighbourtiood
of Mace and Saks Eventually be fought battle with them
for ehece days running st Taliqan between Marv and Balkh On
the third day he was defeated completely and rereated to Ghssnt
TNBI pg

1 Afterwards Mas ud went to India, but un the course of his
tourney at the Mankala. past hus Tucks and Hinds slaves revolted
and took him prsoner and rarsed bis brother Muhammad to the
throne Masud was then sent to the fort of Gini north cast of
Peshawar where he was killed tn 1040/432

132 FUTOHU'S SALATIN

rarq1216 Aker bis army tad marched for a
considerable distance on the road to Hindustio and reached
a place called Mantkala the same group of chieftains who
had given him the erown and signet struck him down with
the sword of encmty, killing him anscancly unawates. Thus
chey created another trouble.

1217-1219 When after a period of nine yeats Mas Od
vacated the chrone and departed from this world,
Muhammad who was a pritoner at Mirikals was taken ovt
af prion quickly, He was crowned a second time; all
stood before him with girded loins,

y220-1223 Four months after this, Maudid matched
troops from the capital, determined to avenge the murder
of his father. God gave him victory over the enemies
He seized Muhtmmad and Lulled him in the batdefield
along with that party of the accursed chieftains |
who Ind eeacherously kulled Mastid and had mode
‘Muhainmad kings

taaq-ia25 After shedding there Blood, Maudid ruled
‘ot nine years in the place of hs father. Then he departed
from this world passing the hey of the kingdom to others

1226-1227 Alrerwards Ali and Muhammad sat jouotly
‘on the throne by the strength of good fortune. *Al was
the son of Mas‘id and Muhammad the son of Maudid,

1228-1229 One day, Tam old, alter ‘ANT and
‘Muhammad had ruled jointly ae the capital for two months,
the army chiefs deposed them from kingship.

1+ Mankals or Marga 1s the name of « pas, tno mils eat of
Hasan Abdal, It has also been weaned with Tania, twelve
smiles northewest of Rewalpindy, Cf, Sachav, 1.p 302, Indus
Anuquery. ol Ml, 7.304, EA, M., 1933-34, peat aed SLM HL,
sols p 153.

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (I) 53

1230-1234 They gave the ning to "Abdu'r-Rashid, son
of Mahmad. When his reign had lasted two years he
was lalled by the malignant Tughnl, who lad been the
clue commander of the army under Mas'id and a slave
from among. the slaves of Mahmiid, This man became
ruler of Ghazni, but forty days after this the slaves of
Mahmid suddenly fell upon hum and eut off fis head.

1235-1237 They delwered the signet to Farrukh, ton
of Mas‘ida Mahmiad, When his reign had lasted seven
yeats, he had an atrach of colic, 1am rold, He died of thar
pain, delivering the kingdom snto the hands of lus brother.

1238-1242 1 am told chat Ibeiliim the Bold who
was son of the victorious Mas‘td, made peace with the
Soljugs and war rarely called upon to fight wit anyone,
He liad elurty-six sons and forty daughters and was a
proud and ltou-hearted hing, He gave all his daughters
im macriage to the sayeds’ and the whole country
and city were happy under him, After a rule of forty
Tong years with Ghazni as his capital, God called hum away
from this world,

4243-1245 When Ibrahim Shah died, “Alzu'ddawal,?
Ins eldest son, ascended the throne at Ghazni, He bore the

name of Mas'id and proved a Iberal_ man of the house of
Mahmid,

1 This alo mentioned m the Tebagits Nann (TN BI,
P20) One of the daughters of Sultan Ibrahim was marred to
4 grandfather of Minhas, author of the Tebegitel Nasir, bid

2 Te.*Alsuddaulah

3, Tn fact ‘Aliu'ddaulah Masud, who 13 also called Mas’ IN,
He bad three soos—Kamtla'ddsulah Sherzid, Arsalan and
Babrim; and all the three ascended rhe throne one after


134 FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

1aq6-1249 Sanjar bin Mahle Shab, a king of the
Saljaq. dynasty, rad a suster of matchless beauty Mabdd
by name, Iam told that during the reign of Malik
IbeShun—a forbeating and generous king—when peace wat
made with the Saljugs, they gave Mabd-s ‘Irag in marrage
to ‘Aliurddawal Mastid,

3250-1252 When by the strength of good fortune
*Alsu'ddawal Mas'id beeame kang an that capttal, he ruled
with such a princely mien that be was highly appreetated
by the leading men, He ded after a reign of seventeen
years.

1253-1255 ‘Aliu'ddawal Mas‘id left behind two
sons'—Arsilin the generous who erowned bumselE after bis
father's death and Bahrim who was influenced by the seats
and was botn of Mabd-s rag.

12561257 When Aesalin beeame king of Ghazni,
Destiny created a split? between Arsalin and Baheim Shah
sn the expels

3258-1259 I am told that Bahri, son of Mas'ddy
went to his mother's relatives. Arsiving on the third day

an the Saljiq country, he made a complaint against bus
brothers

the other, “Isami bas lefr out the frst one. Thus omision 18
pointed out by Me, 9M, fatlar anit Rue and Fall of the
Gbaznavids, p, 28 228, Peshawar, 1940 Also ce T.F. vol 1op 85+
Temay be noted thar Sherzid wat depored. before the first
year of bis reign was over by bis brother Atsalin; and subsequently
he was kalled,
+ Onlis accession Atsslin theew all of his hrothers 110

rson. Bur Babram Shah escaped and fled to Sutin Sanjr and
snvoked bis help.


SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 435

1260-1261 Sanjar', son of Malik Shah king of the
Saljugs, marched with an army agsinst Ghazni to avenge
the wrong, done ro Bahedm Shah, '

1262-1266 Arslia foughe a baule with him and wade
many 2 powerful assault on that mountain-like formidable
foe. When at last the battle of his resisiance was broken
by the stone of the adversary’s attack, le eurned the rcins
of his steed from that batelefield and took 10 Alight®. . His
reign in that capital, I am told, lasted two years, two
months and three days. Sanjar having been victorious
made over the dominion of Ghizni to Babrim and then.
went back to his own eountry*,

1267-127 Aftee Sanjat, the brave Balitim beeame king
in that country, sided by good fortune; and all the Saljugs,
who were his telstions, supported hun, On his maternal
side, he was a Saljq and was thrtefote dependent on
Saljaq aid. On his paternal side, he was a deseendant of

1 At that time Sanjar was the viceroy of Khurisin on behalf
of his brother Mubammad Sultin bio Malik Shih, Acselgn made
ineffective appeals to Sanjat and Mubammat Soltin, requesting
‘them to spare Ghazot from the flames of the vindictive war, insté-
sated hy Babrim, Finally Arsalin seat his stepsmotber who was
sister of Solin Sanjar, charging bie to commend him to the latter.
Bat Babrim had previously tosuleed this ldy by asking her wo
dance before him, R.F.G. J. p. 230.

2 Bahrio fed to India and raised an army with which he
returned to Ghazni as soon as he heard of Sanjar’s withdrawal,
But he made no headway, Sanja having again come and confirmed
Bahrim on the throne, Finally Bahri was arrested and put to
death, He is said to have sled about three years_(1115/509—
3418/512), According ro “Isimi the dates should be 1114/507
+10 116/510. But his dates ate not always telisble,

3 That is, Khucdsin,


136 FUTOHU'SSALATIN

‘Mabmad, 1 am cold that he was a harmless ruler and had
no evil designs against anyone’.

3372-1276 When fis reign had advanced beyond
a decade, disorders* broke out in his dominion, In order
tohill him an army of the Ghons marched upon Gheznt
‘under the command of King *Aliu’ddin of the Ghoti stock,
berter known as Jebatizoz and a brother* of the generous
Sim. When the army ateived at Ghazni, Bahrim Shih
sent his troops to the frontier to repulse the latter.

1277-1282 One day, both tbe hosts came abreast of
each other snd a bartle broke out between the two, In the
bbartle, Daulat Shih che demon-capturer, son of Babtim,
was struck by an atcow and fell off his horse, He was
lalled aftr he had killed many. This mishap caused defeat
‘of the king of Ghaznt and the brave Ghoris set their hands:
to plunder. Babrim Shih wene to Hindustin and the

1 Bahri Shih was 2 pon of fetning and Ineraare, OF
the many week that are sl to bave been ween. duiog Blt
reign the move inprtat war the Kaleb Dinnab, Original ok

cvigin ois endent fem ws present. for and etree ste
Anat Subatithe Kalie Dina wat then tented fo
‘usbic ito Peran by one ‘Novellh bin Maamimad and ded
cated to Babrhn Shab.

2 Prince Qucbu'ddin Muhammad of Gor was put to death
by Babee who thos ovtd weber fer hinsell, He ale dened
is strengi by Sighting bates on Indian sell with one Behl, 28
a whom Ava. Skak bad pppinted in tad. T.F. 1, 9.87
GUND bop. 38

3. “Aliudin Tabaivoe was a brother of Bshis'ddin Sts, the
Inter beng the father of Mivizeudin Mubarssd) Gor the
famous conqueror and poner of Mas ein fain


SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED () 37

Ghoris captured Gheeni, They continued plundering 1
for a week? and then withdrew.

1283-1286 When Babeim heard of the Ghoris’ return
from Ghazni, he lefe Lahore (Labor) for Ghazni and again
became its rulee. Alter a reign of full. forty years and ten
months, he passed away entrusting the key of the kingdom
to Malik Khuseau,

1287-1289 Malik Khusrau, a Turk of the Ghaznf stock
anda descendant of the vious Mahmid, became ruler
of Gheznis and dueing his reign che realm enjoyed peace
and prosperity. Towards che elose of his reign, che Ghuzz™
fell upon Ghaznt, I am eold,

Ghuze capture Ghazni and after « decade Ghiyagu'=
din receptures tt from them

1age-1293 All of a sudden, the Ghuzz fell upon.
Ghazni, Since Khustau Mabk was unprepared he lefe for
Hindustin without giving battle, The Ghuzz captured:
Ghseni withoue delay. When Khusrau Malik strived at

4 For seven days Ghazni was plundered ruthlessly and its.
principal buildings tnelnding the tombs of the Ghaznevs princes
barring those of Mahmiid, Mas‘Gd I and Ibrahim were burnt down,

2 Ghusz is the Arabic form of the Turkish word Ogbure—
the mame of a select branch of the Tuskish people compsining nine”
urkoman mbes who establiubed, in the sixth century A.D, a
nomadie empire stretching from China to the Blach Sea, Towards.
the middle of the seeond ecntory Hiysa (eighth century AD.) the
Ghure Tasks seperated themselves from the prnapal stock of
Tarrers and adopted Isim as theie religion, This took place
ung the raga of the Abbau caliph al-Mahdi bin Mansie (75),
158: 785/169),

In a word, the Ghuzz were identical with the Tutkomans and
their parent stock of the Salyuqs,


338 FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

Lalor lie made it his caprtal. After a reign of seventeen
yyeats he depatted ftom tls sordid watld.

1394-1295 In his place, fis son, who was his
namesake, became king and was addressed as Malik Khusau
by the guards and the army, and be tuled over the
-dominton ftom that capital.

Sultan Ghiyasu'ddin Mubemmad bin Sem snvades Ghazni

1296 1302 When the Ghuzz had held possession of
Ghazni for ten years and nine manths, Ghiyipu’ddiu—a
kmg of Ghort descent and a talented son of Saun’—becaore
rulet of Ghot after bis father. He rushed [1s troops 0
Ghazm and defeated the Ghuzz army 10 one onslaught.
id when that capital, re, Ghaznu, tell rneo lus hands, be
Jefe wan the chatge of chat renowned king Mutvzau'ddin?
the younge: son of Sim, with an atmy around hun like

2 Te,Babsu'ddin Sam See the geneslogyeal table at the cod
of chu chapter,

2 The atte bbws
‘non on the part of

nt namvoar (eenowned ang) 38 an antaps
‘samt Mutizzu'déia was not even 2 king,
as yet, much less renowned Kang It was us 569/174 that
Muttzu'ddia ascended the throve of Ghazes, and 1 tok fsa more
than a decade to extn 2 reputation

3. Ghuyays'ddis and Mu tzzu'ddia were ceal hrothers Their
smother used to call them by the pet name of Habashs aud Zang1—
epithets which tp the opinion of Reverty ate sa evidence of thar
negro-ke dark complexioo (TNR p. 368). But the pet names
coined by the mad affetion of a mother exanot he taken literally.
Perhaps thew skin wore a kind of milky pigment in the midst of
the white skinned ‘Tasks Had they been ‘very dick indeed’ as
Raverty says they could not have been popular leaders of the white
slanoed amirs, malks and Lhaas, Even the populace of Ghor
were proud of ther complexion and racial Fearuret


SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 339

pleides. Then he wuhdrew from there and went from
the frontier of Ghazni towards Ghor,

£303-1305 King Mu'wzzu'ddin, the conqueror of
Hindustan (Hind)? seuded in Ghazoi in sueh a manner
that no body dered to attack fm and all men of standing
gitded up there loins to catry out his orders. The eapical
and country bore him goodwill, not even am ant was
shurt by him,

3306 In (the year)* 569 thot courageous hero ascended
the throne of Ghazni like Mahmad,

1307-1314 When full six yeats of Ins reign had
passed, he led? Ins army with great display from Ghaznt
1nto Hindustin—a vertable geeden, As his army arrwved m
Noabewala, Jar Chand* the Hindi (euler), heard the news,
He ealled the veteran warriors of Hindustin, marched from
Kanauy to Gujstie and fought a battle with the king of
Ghrzni, deving the elephane phalanx in the battlefield
sn such 2 mannee that all the hotses of the Ghazni army:
tan amock, All the Turkish conungents were deleated

+ Khusreo { Hundgir un the eexe(hetally capturet of Hindute
tan) 1s another exsmnple of poeue antirpation on the patt of ‘sim,
Srsteen years were yet to be spent in sundry fighting, before he
could lam to have made any conquests tn Réjpit India,

2 m7sAD,

3. This was the fist Indian expedition of Mubammad Ghort
according t0

4 Jat Chand was the euler of Kanauy, not of Guysrit,
The ruler of Guyseit was Bhim Deva (Deo) according. 0 the
Muslim chronicles, and Mlrdjaaeeotding to the Jain chronicles,
SIM HI, p 202

According to Minhay defeat was wnficted on Mutizru'ddin in
574 Hiya (AD 1178), and Raverty ascribes 1¢ to the fact that
hnu forces were worn out with thet Tong journey through the


140 FUTOHU'SSALATIN

‘and their plans were completely frustrated, They marc
hhomenard in the hope of mustering their clans.*

1315-1317 When king Muttzzu'ddin armed in the
outskirts of Lihoe* (Labswr), Khusrau Malih¥ che Turh—a
descendant of Mahmid being the ruler—=did not consider 1¢
prudent to fight him,

1518. He (Khustau Shih) sene an elephant* at the bands
of bis son® who bowed to king Mutizzw'ddin submussnely.®

1319-1322 The hing of Ghazni accepted the elephant
as nell as the son and then sounded the hettledrums and
left for Ghazni, The following year,’ he mobilized an
army from Ghaznf and marched direetly nto the region of

sandy desert, and acerding to the Hinds sources twat due 2
sudden fall of rtar The bate tok place at Gadarats Gbara,
SIMH, Lp a

1 Belove his match on Labor wich took place an 381 He
AD, 1185 Mutzrvdasa had led an expedison to Dibal 1a 578/,
15 (AD 1183) sod had crated 1.

2 Both che manusenpts of the Fateba’s Selaun (verses 574
1284, 1292 13174 1354, 1973. 1985. 1999, 2053, 2036, 20756
2125 2166, a610, 2132, 8041, 8274, 8327, S921, aod 14436) B00
aba ue, Libor a well as Labs,

3 Ths should be Khosaw Shab, Khowaw Malik was the on of
‘horas Shab See the geselopieal ble at the ead of this
shapeee Ma T.R voll, pp 6162 .

‘4 You wa a renowned dephant, thebestof ts Lind poset
hy Kboraa Mak TNR p 452

55 The mae of bu 200 was hoses Mahi. Lb.

6 Ths ook place wn 577 H (ALD. 1451) according co Miah,
though the dite w dpatae,

7 Le 5784. (AD t1Bs). Miabsy pots ths event the
yest 58 H (AD, 1386) TNR pas


SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (I) a4

Labor, He took Khusan Mabk? prisoner and stayed
there a month, Then he setzed the suburbs of Labor and
the inhabitants submiteed to him.

1323 1324 From Laher, he sent Khustau Mal to
Ghor and himself made a dash anto Hindustin, a second
time? determined to capture this garden

3325 This time, he marched towards Hinsi, having
abandoned the ditection of the previous expedition,

1326 1330 When the rajas of Hindustin heard this
they girded cheie loins to ight hum Pithora led an army
from Aymer and many Indians rallied round him, From
Dehlf came Gobind Ratt to join him All the other eajas
cof Hindustin prepared chemselves for the impending battle,
They took their troops to the boundary of Tarlin and
blocked the way of the Ghons,

3 The Tabegat + Netrs tells us that Mu 12zu'ddin took Kiwseaw
Mak along with huanself co Ghszmt whence he sent lum to Fico
‘koh There Khusrau Malik was presented before Sultan Ghiyapu'd
-din and was throwa as a prsoner mto the fort of Balarwan while
his son Behram Shah was walled up at the Satfrud foctress of
Ghor In 587 H(AD xeg¢) both father and son husra: Mah
and Bahram Shah were murdered TNR p 457 Also see p ta4
fo,2 infra

2 For the fist savasion see p 139.6 m 3

3. This was the fist bare fought by Mu rzm'ddn with
Puthora For the second battle see verses tu -0437 f anfra

According to Minhay (TNR p 458) Mu'tzzu'ddin led an
army towards Subind, and according to Fituhts (T F.1 p99)
towards Babatrds ‘sam shows Hans: as the object of attack
“Thus as not euch wide of the matk since Hans stod at a moderate
distance from Bhatinds

4 ‘lsamy’s Gobind Rats Khandey Rat, ruler of Debh, T F,
volt p 99

‘The Tebagat Nasu (TNR Ty p 458) says that Sichind was

na TUTOHU'S SALATIN

133121336 When the Turkish ttoops (of Ghor) stuved
an Tardin ¥ both the armies unsheathed their swords to Bight.
The brave Hindus on thett patt, didnot delay in fitting
themselves fot the fight. Pithort mounted an elephant
and took hus stand im the centre of Ins army. fn the fore-
ground was attaye!a phalanx of clephants which were
trumpeting aud fosiming mote than the ewer Nile In the
sangvatd stood the aughty Gobind who was mote powerful
than all the Hindus To their lefe and right were a gronp of
te Hindus whote names tad hatdly any previous record,

1337 1338 On the other side all the Turhs atmed for
wor fad mouneed their globe trotting horses Their muleary
officers had taken theit respeetise stands tindee che command
of their king to the left and enght of the atmy,

1339 135¢ In both the umes, the hues being arrayed
the wat mongers on either side invited combats, 1am told
tae the powerful king fumself bolding in (one of) Ins
hands 2 spear fell on the Hindes, shouting and roating like
2 furious hon and eegredless of the elephants and elephant-

place! under the charge of Quer Ziyau'din Tulaks 2 telauon of
Minhay with # gsttucn of s z00horie Then Mutezu ddin ptoe
ceeded to Ghazer anton Ins return he fought the battle at Tatain
‘with Peuhivt Ray and his son Gols TNR Lp 458

+ Tarsin 2 situated about seven eles north of Aaroal
Fieshta's punted text (T Fell p 10s) gives Tatain, not Naesin
ss has been reported cbewbere (Sf MH vol 1p 202)
Subsequently Tatsin becaese known at Taraen or Tiawet

Ina useful appendie (F M Rp 363) Dr Habibullh says
that che batlefield of Tarain may be adentifie} wach a wllage called
Torwans 27 mules from Suess (Sarmuts) Ths conelusion he hat
reached with the help of the information given by Cunningham
CR, nv, pp 68 69


SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (I) “43

mounted wattiors, In the course of fis onslaught upon
the Hindus, he dashed towards Gobind’s contingent,
shedding much enemy blood on the spor. Seeing Gobind
‘mounted on an elephant tn the midst of his army he—the
army-breaking hero—spurred his horse and threw 2 lance:
at the mouth of Gobind. As a result, he broke four
teeth of Gobind but the warhke Gobind in return
revengefully struck rhae lion-hearted king a blow with his
javelin, This blow wounded the arm of the king and he
was thrown from his horse. On seemg him in such a
condition a certain Khali? who stood near by, immediately

1 Bhlp—the adjectival frm of Khalj—1s the name of a Tucish
tnbe who are teported in che Tabegit~t Akbart (T AB 1, p, 116)
to have been deseendints of Qsly Khia, soa-ineaw of Chingiz
Khia, eas supposed that Qsly Khan subsequently settled with
30,000 members of his tribe in thehilly sraets of Ghor and the
‘adjoining parts where lus descendants who later became Ienown as
Bhalj (Qaly being resasformed into Khily and Kal) entered snto
the service of the Sultans of Ghor. ‘Utbi, 2 contemporary writer,
deseribes the Afghans and Kbalis a inhabitants of Lamaghia and
Peshawar, and im his account of the war between Jaip’t and
Subukeigia he says thar che larter annexed Lamaghin and Pesbiwar,
and the anhabirants of those parts, namely Afghtas and Khaljis
sade their submission and were drafted anto his aries (wa dinet

Afgbimystoo wal Kbely Fa meti shee! uteshire minbum
sw alaje fi Rbsdmates by T.¥.p.29) A reference wo Budiim
(Mie T. p. 43) and Fubra (T+ F, fp. 154) bears vbis out showing
that the Khal) tnbe of the Turks bad served in the armics of
Ghsznt and Ghee much before the buth of Chiogiz Kbin, It
follows that rhe Khsly ede had settled an Turkastin at a very
‘exily date and then in some unknown penod hey migrated from
Turkusin and made their abodes somewhere sn che western sector
ofmodem Afghinutin Afrerwards some adlventurous members
of thus unbe jotoed service under the rulers of Ghszmi aud Ghor,


144 FUTOHUS SALATIN

rushed towards him, and serzing hum salflly dragged
tuum amay from the batdefield* When the army saw their
‘hing an ehat eondition they took to fight

13521355 A defeat was anflieted upon the Tuckish
contingents and every contingent of thes set out for th
own country The defeated king went westward from
Hindurtin, and on reaching Labor an dirgesee strengthened
many fortifications He stopped a month of ewo at Lihor,
Tam told, then went on to Ghazni

1356-1359 On his atewal an Ghazni that hon like king.
sent 2 messenger to the country of Gher, and. giving vent
to lus indignation, he had hosrau che Turk and tus son
executed” Thus Khuseau, a king of good habies deparced
from thus world after a reign of fourteen years He was
the fase of the descendants of Mchmud and had been
an ocean of kindness and a mine of generosity

1360 Thae day, by the pervecsity of fate, the world
saw the last of the house of Mahmad

seeming them as sldirs and statermen Later they rote o fill the
fughest offices of reaponsibihey an the governmeot and army of
Ghor and Dehli ove such adventurer being Muhammad bea
Daheyar Khali the reputed conqueror of Bengal and another
roe hia the founder of the Khaln dynasty of Dethe fe hes been
suggested that Bablat Lodi who founded the Lodi dynasty in 1450/
155 had descended from a clan of the hhalys El vol 2 p 875

1 Mesa ells thi Kbalp soldier a Kha} stnpling who span
‘ehind the Shan and” supporng hot hseshe mge the
‘hocse with hs vote and brought hica our of the Fld of bate”
TN Rp 460

2 Thats bhusrau Malik and his son Bahram Shah were
executed Te should be noted hat there were two Baraca Shas
one was the grandfather of Khusrau Male and another was his

Seep qu fmt supre and compare CH 1 Ip 37


SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 45

Sultin Mitvzeu'ddin Muhammad's resolve to march
upon Hindustan for the thied* ume and bis achieving victory
over the Hindus.

1361-3365 1 have heard from the clioniclers of
Hindustin that when Fortune had deserted the rayas of this
country, Mu'zzzu'ddin was sleeping peacefully in bed one
night. In a dream, he beheld an old man with a hey in
his hand saying: *O young man, take this key and open
with 1 che country of Hindustin. While still dreaming,
he thought that the old man, who gave the good news, was
Sim,

33661372 On awaking, the king did not descnbe
the deeam to anyone and kept ita secret, Later, he tncere
pteced se for humeelf and by humself and see his heatt aecore
dingly on earrying oue the wishes of the old man, Then
hhe summoned the atmy chieftains and lavished on them
much money and many jewels, He wisely proposed to
anake a sudden attack on che Indian Rit saying, ‘Friends!
We must march on Hindustin’, All the chieftains bowed
to him and everyone resolved fiemly to earry aut hus order.

3372-1377 This ineident was differently narrated by
the old headman in the form of a eharming story, viz. the
lang of Ghaznt led bis troops twice over against the country.
which 1s more pleasant than a garden, Kanawy was the
copueal of rts kings and Jar Chand was then the crowned
ruler there, When king Mutwzzu'ddin marched upon
Hindustin twice over, not even once was he favoured by
fortune, He fled from Hindustin back to lus own country
‘on both occasions.

1 For the fist expedition see verses 13071314 and foot note
‘3+ and for the second expedition see versts 1323°1324.

446 FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

1378-1385 One day, as be rolled in bed his bead
testing on his mother’s lp, be was plunged into deep and
serious thought. At that time no one was preseut there
exept lus mother and he felt hughly aggrieved on account
of bus disappointment in the country of Hindustin, If a
fly settled on his face, tus kind mother drove 1 away.
When the anguish of his fheate exceeded all limits, ns
mother percewed st and enquted saying, ‘O country:
capturing King, what ate you. brooding over? For some
‘me you have been plunged an the ocean of thought like a
frendless man. Speak your mind outright, do not wander
alone in the plain of anxiety.”

1386-1391 When the king heard this from bis mother
he sid. “O wellavshung mothet! Since you want the secret
cof my heart from me, I see no way out but to tell you
the truth, I'am now going to tell you my secret for I know
that you will not augment my heart sore. Then he urcered
4 complaint and cursed Destiny saying : “Upon the country
of Hindustan I marched with 3 huge army twiee over, but
on both occasions 1 eame back, fleeing to Ghazni. On
account of this my heart 1s distressed,”

1392-1399 When the mother heard this from het son she
sad. ‘O king, may you enjoy prospenty for ever 1 May God
delwer into your bands the kingdom of the world | Listen
to the advice of 2 mother, accept tt af you find 1¢ reason-
able, You must not give up pursuing znd endeavouring co
do the work on which you have set your heart, O suecessful
chief, If Fortune lias disappointed you twiee, you should
make two hundred mote attempts still unul you sehueve
your objets Don't you see that every, moment I dave
amay the fy from your face a hundred times yet the fy

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (I) 447

retumns two hundred times more with a drawn sting in
order to achieve its object, How mcely the sand stftets
observed that 1t 1s the hand of sifters that reaches the gold.’

1goo-rgor When the king heard this advice from hts
mother, again his thoughts eeavelled to Hindustin, He sat
con the throne and opened the treasury and gave to everyone
money according to his position.

1402-1406 In his armny, there were four great vererans
who were equal to him in stubbornness, They bad grown
old in the service of kings but each looked like @ young
man at che ume of fighting. Fast was Khurbak, a
renowned hero, second was the powerful and talented
Khumil, third was Albab,t a warrior of Kimistlihe
strength and fourth was Maklabah,? an old veteran of Ghor.
‘Under the command of each of these was a large body of
troops and each had travelled across the world from one
end to the other.

1407-1410 OF the other men tm che king's service—
each becoming king after fim—ong was Tayu'ddin
Yalduz, a generous man who after the king's death
became monarch of the Ghaznf terntory, another was
Qabicha who, after His Mayesty® (Shab s Jabin) became
Jang in Multia, another was the powerful and renowned
euemish, a slave of the intelhgent Quebu'ddin,

1 Ilysh, secording to Ht MS

2 Kimus was the name of a powerful king of ancient Iran

3. Minhay gives this name as Husa Abstmil He had a
son Mabie sIzzu ddin Husain who distinguished himself an the
sevice of Mutizzu dua Muhammad Ghors TNR. pp 474 43
that is Muzzuddis Muhzonmad of Ghor i

43 FUTOHU'S SALATIN

Sultin Muvzen'ddin Mubsromed bin Sim's march
for the third time on Hindustin and achieving victory
‘over the Hindus

rgitengta Malik Quebu'ddin Arbsk was one of the
special slaves of His Majesty to whom the king would
tell all lus secrets and none enjoyed closer access in privare
audience than he.

1413-1423 Once His Mayesty said to him in secret
‘Our ambition 1 spusred again. Twice from the reritones
of Hindustin we have come back frusteared, This time,
1 entertain a hope thar the dark night might turn into 3
bright day and the Ghocr satd will go direct snto the
country of Hindustin by the help of God. However, there
1 one dificulty The horses of our army have never seen
the features of elephants. Que cavalrymen suffer defeat
beeause our horses fight shy of the elephants. You should
order that some elephants of mud and wood—mountain ke
and steady--be made and snstalled inthe midst of the
fcld, all weanng stms and clad in armour, Then all our
troops should mount rhetr horses, wearing war arms and
annie in the field galloping these distance travelling, horses,
‘When our horses become accustomed to the sight of the
elephants, out cavalrymen will not be defeated.”

142q Atbak did as the hing had ordered The
following day the army sarted from there,

Forty Turkish borsemen yon Sultin Ma'sze'ddin on
the confines of Sind.

1gas-1q29 The king conducted the army rowards
Hindustan. One day, after hus arrival near the boundary
of Sind, forty vigorous Turkish hersemen waited on him

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 149

Everyone was like Rustam an war and everyone was
riding a swiftlooted black horse. His Majesty enquired
of them saying. “Where are you conung from? Where
do you intend proceeding from this country ? What 1s
your real object in this yourney 2”

1430 1435 An ingentous man from among those
forty heroes tnvoked blessing on the exalted hing and said,
*Your Majesty 1 We are forty Turks coming from the
same distrtcr. We belong to the country and race of the
Turks. A calamity has belallen us on account of which
wwe have lele our family and people and have come out of
our own country, looking for a good omen, Now that
we have the honout of kissing your royal foot, fortune will
simile on us

1436-t438 When che lang heard thete story, he had
them robed and gave them riches and much encourage
‘ment, and employed them all in his service. He continued
advaneing slong with the atmy, taking booty {rom every
distriet,

1439-1440 Alter they had passed beyond the extrem
tues of Multin, the news of their arrival reached Aymery
But who could muster courage to break: the news in that
region for fear of Pithora 1

1441-1445 When the conceited Pithora, I am told,
realized that Divine atd was with him and that he had once
defeated the Turks, he became puffed up, so much so that
he heeded no ore, and no expertenced counsclior remained
with him. Even when the army of che Turks arrived
1m the region of Tardin and everyone became awate of it,
no one communicated the news eo the Rai because the latter
was disagreeable and conceited.

350 FUTOHU'SSALASIN

1446. Fwally as the army drew closer, the soldiers
(of the Rir’s army) lacking powet and patience, beeame
confounded.

1qq7-1gge One of the wives of Pithora whispered
the news reluetanely into his ears saying, ‘O Rit of the
country of Hindustin ! I have heard that the shameless
Turks who had run away from the Rat in battle have come
back mnto this country agzin and fomented trouble all over.”

1451-1454 On hearing thisy Pithora Isughed and his
blood boiled. He ordered that a throne of gold be constructed
for kus royal self and said: ‘Should the disttacced Turk yom
batele with us again, I would eaprure him alive sn the course
of battle and tie him readily to the foot of this throne.”

1455 1456 When the army of the Turks drew closer,
the Hindus! gieded thei loins to destroy che Turks. Pithora
erected a royal enclosure and the army pitched their tents
srovnd him,

Puthora and Gobind fight « second betile
with Sultan Mutizen'ddin and are killed
1457-1458 The nest morning, at sunrise, both the
armies took their respective posttions in the field and the
clouds of dust, raised by them, passed beyond the ninth
vaule of the sky.
1459-1464 On one side that valiant Hinds with 2
phalanx of ferocious elephants m the front took up bis
position, deep in the centre, together with all the seasoned

1 “Isami has depueted hss bate ice many othe + asa fight
between the Hindus and Musalmans. But such war not the ease,
infact There ws evidence to beheve thet thete were Hindus 19
the army of Mutwzzu'ddia Muhammad of Ghor Even the new

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (I) 154

Hindd wartiors, ‘The accursed Gobind whose teeth the
king had broken stood 1m the vanguard of lus army along,
swith his contingent at a distanee of one srtoweflight from.
Prhors. To the left of Gobind stood Bhola, wazit of the
Rai Badamsa Rawal took hus stand on the eight wing.

1465-474 On the other side, the enemy-hunting hing
put hus ariny tn battle array to the left as well as to the right.
fun che centre he humtelf took Ius stand, suerounded by his
obedient ttoops The demon-eapturing Kiyebak was in the
vangufed and the ineelligent Alba was un the right wing.
In the left wing stood Makalba who wasa nian fie to
undertake the hardest of tasks, Kteril, a man of vietotious
tradieions, who was as stong 35 1ron and as resolute as steel
went into ambush ata distance of one arrowsfhght, belund
the centre of the army under the king's command, As for
Qurbu’ddin Atbak, he otgantzed a mobile column of troops
sn accordance with the toyal order. He had come forwitd
peeonally and taken Ins stand neat the king. He looked
ike a fire mounted on wind, This time the king had with
fuum one lakh and thuety thousand cavalrymen, I am told, All
were ead in iron and eovered with steel and their horses
were armoured from head to foot.

1475-1481 When the atmues on both sides wete set 19
bate atray, dust arose from there spunging from side to
side The concerted Gobind sprang Wke an unbslaneed man,
In front of hus array dashed noisily a phalanx of steel elad
ferocious elephants. As they fell suddenly on Khuebak’s

gation of Boatinda which was placed under the charge of Qazt
Zayau dda Tulsk contained contingents of Hindustant soldiers

who were either Hindus ot had sprung from Hindu stock
CHT NR p 458

352 FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

contingent, simultancouly there sounded many a drum, bugle
and trumpet. Khiebsk held up the shield to his face but
budged not an inch 1n spite of the pandemonium, He told
hus comrades to make an assault on the elephantadrvers,
Accordingly some clephant-lawvers were wounded and the
whole phalanx of elephants took to flight.

1482-1485 Tam told that che phalanx of elephants
hhaving thus fled, Khurbah beating the drum passed beyond
the elephants, When che king saw the enemy troops
fleeing be ssid, ‘Let the zemy chieftains move stmultafcous-
ly from ight snd lefe and fall upon the belligerent
nem. He himself sprang from the centee along with tbe
veterans who were well-versed in che use of speats,
arrows and swords.

3486 When ehe Hindus saw this upsurge, they wete
seized with tetror and began fleeing, cow after tow.

1487 The atmy of the Turks got che upper hand in
that fight and the adversaries took to their heels.

1488-1489 Their veteran wattiots fell upon the
tenenmtes, one and all, and put them to che sword ruthlessly.
Then they set their hands to plunder and the entire camp
of the enemy fell nto their hands.

1490-1491 Pithora, the country-capturing Rit, was
‘aptured alive and the lions of Ghor ext of his head which
they carried to the hing of Hon-like strength.?

1492 Gobind having fallen 1n the battlefield they
took his head too to the hing.

1493-1495 They captured two hundred elephants
which were trumpeting and mere impetuous than the
torrents of the Nile besides many horses of Indian stock,

x Thats Mutizrwddia Mohammad bio Sem

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 153

and Arabian breed and other horses, tents, saddles and
mules,

1496 They also decapitated many of the enemies
and serzed the whole of that area and Land,

1497-1500 The same day the country-conquering
Turks seized Aymer,1 am told. Then che suburbs of
Aymer were overrun by hing Mu'zzu‘ddin Ghoti. In such
amanner did he ride gloriously everywhere chat even the
mountains, seized with terror began to shake, and on
cccupying the area of Ajmer, he annihilated the abodes of
the enemies,

1501-1507 He offered boundless thanks to God mt
the manner of a godly man. One day, he summoned the
leading offcers* and case much gold i the skite of evety-
one, Asa result, they (the royal attendants) were actuated.
and arranged a féte, They raused a lofty eanopy which
eclipsed the sun, Ie was decorated on all four sides, and
musicians sat from corridor to corridor. For a week the
hang thoroughly enjoyed humtelf but he negleeted not
thanks giving to God. Verily he who expresses gratitude
0 God, enjoys the frute during Ins own lifetime,

1508-1514 When the Hindi troops were defeated
many of them were taken prisoner alive, I am told, They
enguured, saying.. ‘Where are those contingents—the
green-elad swift riders,? each mounted on a swift-footed
horse—who have captured us? When His Mayesty’s
soldiers heard this they went to hum and narrated this, Fis
Myesty who had been already mitiated in the mystery
“Knew that thae victory was due to Divine aid whieh comes

+ Tha ss, the lading offers of the semy.
2 That as angels


ast FUTOHU'S.SALATIN

from on high to those who devotedly praise God, The
tcwmphant king dedieated tus tongne to praising the
Almighty God.

1515-1530 intelligent, talented king, do not
fFemain negligent of God's peatses under any circumstance.
Look 1 From blending of water and earth how elegant
lias the Uniserse Creator made you. Frest, He created you
san animal; then you became a rational anuinal. Having
made you a rational animal and man He made you choice
‘of all men. He gave you a share in the religion of
Muhammad, He showered favours on you holy soul and
gave you kingsip in the world; the whole city and
country eame into your hands, IF you do not thank God,
hhow can you achieve victory, O tang? The Iugh and
lows woman and man; king and beggat—all are in dry
bound to thank God. Whoever has declined to thank
God, all his wealth has petished in the long run, Whata
good advice has been given by the grear sages | That is
a slave must ceturn thanks to God in all eiteumstances. If
you are an insolvent, even then you should return thanks
to God so that pursuing thus you might become tich. If
you are wealthy tender thanks to Providence so that wealth
may inerease and stay. Whale enjoying health you should
offer thanks to God so that you may not suffer from ailment
as long as you live, intelligent man, If you are siling
the same isthe remedy. I have not seen in the wide world
any elixit other than thanksgiving. Should you acquire
the virtue of rendeting thanks to God you would not be
ungrateful for the benefits, already received, No word
other than shukr (thanks be eo God) must be uttered day
and night: you muse close your lips agsinst every other
cterance,


SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 155

1531 Rendering ehanks to God 1s an obligation on
all, parneularly on the wealthy man and the king.

1532-1539 Lam told that out of the kings and
wealthy men—when God gave them resources in the world
—four men returned increasingly great thanks to God, that
15, two men of wealth and ewo country-conquering kings.
From among the kings one wasa king of Ghazni called
Mahmad, another was that Ghoei king of hugh descent,
who went by the trle of Mutizzu'ddin, From among the
wealthy men, one was M'an,? another was Yahy3,? borh
being proverbually renowned for their kindness and genero-
sity. Although all the four have departed feom this world,
their names are outstanding in history. ET could cheeish
their memory, I would deink every morning the lovers? wine
sn thete name, In this rransitory world, my wine is always
gratitude to God and my desserts the names of the men
of prety.

1540-1542 Every morning—the ume for enjoyment
and at the morning deink—I wil unter as dictated by my
soul: ‘come, O cup-bearer, give me the cup of secrets and
a sense of repulston from che wine disnlleries, | Make me
so intoxicated with such a wine that even if the whole
world were ruined, I should mor feel 1."

x Mian hin Zaudsh—a contemporary of Mansur the second
Atband ealiph—was for some ume governor of a Jairah, a region
an tbe Euphrates Doab He was noted for his generosity and
Ierality and wsed co give away large sums to pocts, presenting 12
this manne # conta 0 the caliph of hu age, Manes Damngs
2 provecbully thafty and musedly peson,

2 YohyR bin bald of the Barak family of Baghdad wat
famous for hus exteordimary chanty He sever duappointed
sayone who approached him

156 FUTOHU'SSALATIN

Sultan Mu sezu'ddin berreges Goshor (Galiyit) and the
daughter of the Ras of Gwalor comes out and returns
after making pesce

£543 0545 One day when Murzzu'ddin—that king
wich an ocean like army who had been resolute inthe path
of God—-became victorious over the Hind croops, he lefe
that plee, He matched the atmy im the ditecton of
Gwaltoe! (Galryur) with a snule on bs ps and joy sn his
heart

1546-t550 When His Mayesty arewed" in Gwahor, no
one ftom among the Hindus came out of the fortress
They were struck with terror on seeing the royal army
and fele a4 af the whole world was filled wich His Majesty's
swoops They astd

‘Thus huge army—which has defeated the croops

of Hindustia, has cue the heads of Pithora and

Gobind and has routed these eanks 19 one onslaughe—

48 to be feared Jest at should attach our foreress and

‘umn the Hind® foundations into dust?

t550-t554 The Rit of Gwalior became nervous through
weakness “Day and might he was drowned in sottow, his

4 "Gwalior though shin to the Eaghsh spell
The xpellng wally found sa the chronicles 2 Ge
and Kalyor

2 The Tap'l Masur (A$ Ms No 110, p 335E) gues
Duck acount of the conquest of Gavhar (Rabun), and certain
feaares of the story mentioned by ‘samt ste wacesble an it For
instance, on xing the army of Mu tzu'ddia nvade bis dominion
SclaoktwPal the rat of Geshar beezme alarmed and dusprted
He sued for patdon end surrcadered agreeing to pay tribute and
g7ve ten elephants asa peace offing On this coodition the
fore of Gwalior wat restored to hums ED It p 238

adjustable
ot Galyur


SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 157

fortress wat like a boat surrounded by an ocean-lke army.
Tiree or four months passed in ehis manner, then Destiny
brought forth a strange thing. All the inmates of the
fortress began to celebrate a Hindi festival. The Hindus,
wherever they are, perform their religious ceremonies
according to their custom.

1555-1563, Inside the fortcess (of Gwalior) they held
fete. They were all aggrieved at hearr, though outwardly
they were magnificently dressed. But the Rat had a
‘gin daughter whose beauty added lustre to that of the
moon. By means of a single flirtation she used to break
the barriers of patience and plundered the human endurance
completely, I am told that on that day of the féec,
‘wearing ornaments from head to foot, she come most
cheerfully to che Rit, attended by sixty-seven maids of
silvery body. She respecefully kissed the foot of her
father, not alone bur, along with che other rosy-cheeked
maids, Then she ssid:

+O Rit of lucky sears! Thus as the day of rejoteings
give us the customary annual gift and observe the
convention of our land and country.’

1564-1570 When the father beard this from bis
daughter, he sad* O dear one, dearer to me chan
my own Iifel Every year, at spring time, in the
garden of Hindustan the rayas of Hind gwe the
revenue of a district to their daughters and adorm
their foreheads with a golden crown. But this year
you excuse me for I have been deprived of
the administration of the country. In this country
another man has become king through whose fear my
hhouse has become a dungeon. Since, another man
is kang in my country and I have been deprived, do


158 FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

not ash me for the customary gift. Ii you so ike,

you may desire ehts gift from him for all the revenue

1s collected by him.”

1571-1575 When the daughter heard this from her
father, she walked out of the fortress with grate and
digmry. Wearing on hee head a bejewelled crown, she
sat on a chestou horse and was followed by a large number
fof amiable women. All of them rained in the art of
blanduhments and mounted on horses came out suddenly
from the fottress From the atmy of the Tuths arose a
gasp end every person blushed and became radiant.

1576-1578 The Turks rushed rowatds the fortress,
having girded their loins one and all, to gwe battle, They
sow an army of girls with silvery bodies who could captuce
anyone by means of there curls All were phets of the
atrows and swords of Blandishments, all were like the
angelcepturing deer.

1579-1581 When the Turks saw such an ormy, their
hostility was ttansformed into love, Porting eheir swords
into the scabbards they took those gurls to their own hing
of renown, The daughter of the Rit who was in the lead
prostrated herself immediately as she eame before the king

1582-1587 She invoked Blessings on him amidst a
hundred good wishes and sand: *O king of the globe!
Today 1 féte in the country of Hindustin, and the Indian
rolersare celebrating the new year to-day by giving much
wealth to ther daughters and placing golden crowns
on ther heads, Today according to the conventions.
of my county, I aed the Rit the customary gilt
for myself But our Ri, having been deprived of rule,
hnas seat me to Your Mayesty (Shsbryii)"


160 FUTOHU'SSLATIN

1602-1604 Aer the kang of Ghyzni had captured
Hindustin he sounded the deur of rerwtn towards Ghsent
making Quibu'ddia Atbak goveroor of Hindustin, Hi:
Mayesty posted lum at Kubrim whence an asssult could be
made upon every district.

r6o5-1611 I am told chat while recurning the king
passed through the terntory of Gujatit, Along rhe
Iughway, he saw a strong fortress named Abranwiss! ic
which many Hindus bad made dheir abode, Around tha
forrest the king struggled for a month bue hardly did b
find a way to conquer st, Eventually, 1 heard chat
{great number of Hindd troops collected from the ar
stound, and one night, from inside as well as from outs!
the fortress they fell upon the Muslims and overwheln
them. During that night chey made an ausaule unaw.
and lulled many Turks.

s6r2-1614 When che king perceived that kind of t
typical eo the HindG he made a successful withdrawal {
that place on the following day. After some time
reached Ghazni where his army rested from the £3
of the journey, The survivors sat in one place, remet
tng those who had been martyred.

1615-1617 In the cy of Ghazni one was lau
another was bewading, for in this world none is free
these two fearures. In one house, there was mournin
another mesimentsi, sach. wat the camden oh

paradise of Ghiznt full of paleces, One arrived
loaded with booty, while another was matty:
Hindustin.

3 This for cannot be idenufied, From the contest it
thar his ts Nabrmala, nox Patan, the then capital of Gojat3

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) x64

1618-1621 No one knows this practiee except Destiny
whe gives joy of drinking 0° one and eroprsickness to
“another. Sine conditions in the world are changing
constantly, few have probed into its mystery. Come, O
cup-bearerl Pour wine in my cup and telieye me from the
evil times so that I might eaptute rhe other world through
intoxication (masti) and use the pen to write another stoty.

Schemert busy in misrepresenting Qutbuddin Aibsk
before the Sultin who summsors Quebu'ddin —*

1622-1625 The renowned Quibu'ddin whom His
Majesty had, lefe in Hindustin—after bringing the #767 of
Kolm well under eontrol—best the deum of mateh
towatds Meetut (/Mirath). In one onslaught be eaptured
that forttess; and in che course of one week he broughe that
region under his conttol and moved about in thae atea as
he hiked, making a new conquest evety day.

1626-1630 .One day, he led the atmy from Mirath,
and on the ehitd day he arrived ae the fortress of Dehli,
He conquered that lofty fortress quickly, erushing the
resisting forces! The whole of Katehe submitted to hiis
and the stronghold (katt) of all the local chieftains having
been subdued they came to pay homage at his court in the
course of the succeeding one year or two, Every day his
territories (gf) inereased and the chiefs thetein made sub-
mission m hie,

1631-1634 When a great number of troops had
rallied round him, some schemers ssid to the king: ‘Quibu'=
Adin as revolted against your Majesty (Sbab-i afaq)* and

1 Gumrabin in the text will literally mesa,
«2 Literally king of tbe world,
nu

160 FUTOHU'S SLATIN

160a-160q Alter the king of Ghyzni had captured
Hindustin he sounded the deum of rerura towards Ghazal
making Quybu'ddin Aibsk governor of Hindustin, His
“Majesty posted lnm at Kubtim whence an assault could be
made upon every district.

1605-1611 I am told that while returning the king
pasied through the terntory of Guyscit. Along the
ughway, he saw 2 strong fortress named Abranwitst 19
which many Hindus had made thete abode, Around that
orweess the king struggled for 2 month but hardly did he
finda way to conquer st. Eventually, 1 heard chat 2
great number of Hindd troops collected from the area
round, and one night, from inside as well as from outside
the fortes they fell upon the Muslims and overwhelmed
then. During that night they made an anaule unawares
and lulled many Turks

1612-1614 When the king perceived thar kind of trek.
‘py pieal to the Hindd he made a successful withdtawal. from
that place on the following day. Alter some time, he
reached Ghazni where his semy rested from the fugue
of the journey, ‘The survivors sat in one place, temember-
ang those who had been marryred.

3615-1617 In the exy of Ghszat one was laughing,
another was bewailing, for in this world none 1s free from
these rwo features, In one house, there was mourning, 19
another merriment: such was the condition of this
paradise of Ghizni, full of palaces One awed there

loaded with booty, while another was martyred in
Hindustia,

1 Thus fore cannot be sdentiied From the context at appears
tae thus ts Nahemla, now Patan, the then capital of Gujarat.


SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 36a

1618 1621 No one knows this practice exept Destiny.
who gives joy of draking to one and crop sickness to
another, Since conditions in the world are changing
constantly, few have probed ano ats mystery. Come, O
cup-beateel Pout wine an my cup and reheve me {rom the
evil times so chat I might capture the other world through
intoxication (mazti) and use the pen to write another story.

Schemert busy in murepresenting Qutbuddin Abst
before the Sultia who summons Qutbu'ddin —*

3622-1625 The renowned Quybu'ddin whom His
Moesty had lefe in Hinduscin—afeee bringing the #913 of
Kubeim well under control—beat the dem of march
tovwards Meerut (Mirsth) In one onslanglit he captured
chat fortress, and in the course of one week hie brought that
region under Ins control and moved about im that aces as
he hked, making a new conquest every day.

1626 1630 One day, he led the army ftom Murath,
and on the thicd day he atewed at the forteess of Dehli.
He conquered that lofty fortress quickly, erushing the
resisting forces! The whole of Katehr submitted to him,
and the stronghold (katt) of all the local elutefrains having
been subdued they came eo pay homage at hits court in the
course of che succeeding one year or two, Every day his
erctocies (gtd) mnereased and de elvels ehecein made sub-
mission 10 him,

1631-1634 When a great number of troops had
tallied round lum, some schemers sad to the hing> *Quibu'>
din bas revolted against your Mayenry (Shib-1 afiq)* and

3 Gwmraban in the texewill beerally mesa
2 Literally king of the world
ul

163 FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

proclaimed himself king of the whole of Hindustin, He
has become so conceited on account of Ins riches and
strength that he considers mo one superiot co himself.
They spoke much teueh as well as unteuths about him and
showed Ins mill ay curd.

1635-1639 When the king became suspicious of
Quybutddin, lie sent a messenger tn otder to put him to
text, saying, ‘Tell Quybu'ddin, O tntelhgent and good
snared mant Ip this region we have to confront
serious opposition which cannot be surmounted by 2 litle
soldiery. You should leave behind 2 man of intelhgence
who might be an expece tn administration. You must
come over here soon and must not neglect this, O sccesse
ful elnet

1640 When that messenger eame to Quybu'ddin Aiba
he leatnt ftom hum about the king's suspicions.

1643-1647 Quibu'ddto sent nm back to the royal
court saying, ‘O royal messenger, go back from here
to the hing, tteading suifdly the road you have come by
‘When you finish ehe long journey, kiss the king's foot on.
my behalf. Then invoke blessmgs as my name and say to.
the ruler, *Arbak ts your wellewishing slave; he would
never smetve from your court’ A week after this, Atbske
Inumself stated for the royat eapral.

Quibu'ddin Arbsk sets ont towards Ghazni leaving
Shamsu’din Uswtimub am Eland

1648 1650 There was a respectable Turkish slave
named Inatmish who had proved himself by far the best
wartiot in battle, and mn every other business he had
acquitted himself intelligently and wisely, In the royal


SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 163

court be held a postion whiel roused the jealously of the
army officers.

1651-1655 When Malik Qutbu'ddin Aibak—a man
of good habits and benevolent nature—set out for Ghazni,
he left the ssid Meutmish in Hindustin and himself
marched with a huge army to perform His Majesty's
pibor. When tbe army reached Abranwiga the Hindus
revolted and became aggressive, Poweeful as they were in
those days they advanced from ehe forttess to a distance
of two parasange,

1656-1661 Seeing the enemy forces advance, the
exalted Quybu'ddin, who was like a lion at the time of
fighting, stopped his horse for 3 moment, He sumaioned
ths comrades who were like lions in the battlefield and said:
+O my comades, let us duplay our fighting sll in chis
battle, We should abstain from attaying the Ime; we
must anke a surprise attack like a fierce lion, In a moment
Jet us break the enemy's ranks; then we will assail their
fortes’.

1662-1663 Saying vhis he dashed his horse towatds
the enemy shouting Allib-o Akbar. He broke the enemies*
ranks in one sally. Wherever there was a ehuef, he was
captured alive.

1664-1665 The Turktsh terves arrived in unbroken
succession and damaged the enemy's fortsess. They
captured it in no ume for they were helped by luck and
were destined for victory,

1666 1672 When Qutbu'ddin captured that forttess
completely che world was amazed at thae victory. For
two or three days he stayed, collecting all the goods in
that fortes. The day after, at sunrise, he left one of his
relatives cheee with 2 contingent of troops. He lumsele


164 TUTOHU'SSALATIN

marched with che army to Ghvzni, seatrering gold along.
the way. On hus areal near Ghazni be quartered Ins aemy
in a lowland, 1 am told, From tliat lowland ie rode
alone, advancing swilly cowards Ghazot.

1673-1675 At nightfall, in the solitude of the occa-
son, the sky spread its yolden cover. The king of midday
went nro privacy; the domimon of the day became
property of the king of che might, The vaule of the sky
beeame full of dusk, the aged unwese became youthful
Pm676-2680 Mabie Quabu'ddia eed Ghszst and
proceeded to the house of 2 wazie who was lus close
friend, On ateving at che latter's door, lhe asked the
beaters to announce tus presence, The beaters did 40,
saying co the wazie ‘A horseman has come to out portico,
He wishes to see you urgently."

3681-1686 When the wise minoster heard this he came
out of the lonse in laste. On seeing Aibah he was amazed
and embraced lnim warmly. Then for 2 while both nareated
heir stories briefly in front of the door. Later both drove
together to the royal court. On arriving there, the
virtuous and hospeable wazie made Quiba'ddin sit an
the portico while he Inmself walked gently into the
palace.

1687-1692 On appearing. before the king the ws
bowed and uttered dua then he suid +O king of the whole
earth, I have troubled Your Majesty ar an odd hour but I
shave brought good news Firstly Aibak who 1s one of Your
Majesty's slaves ts at the door, secondly the later—a lucky

2 De'a (terally Blessings) wa term comatonly wsed to express
good wishes

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (I) 165

man and a veteran wattior—has conquered Ahranwia,
Now he has come to Your Majesty’s court in all humilis
tion and with apologies.’

1693-1694 When che king heard this from, the
wazir lus enlightened royal mind was delighted, and said,
“Let Abak come inside the palace ‘immediately.’

1695-1696 The wazit withdrew from the royal
presence aud conveyed the king's messages to the ushers
and called Malik Qutbu'ddia inside.

1697-1701 Immediately on seeing His Majesty,
Asbak kissed the ground and ran up, Most eagerly he
performed the king's pibor and then ung the key of
the Abranwefa fortress at the royal feet, saying

‘Besides thts present for Your Majesty I have
many more presents which I have left with the troops

whom I have concealed, O trumphant king, at a

distance of three patasangs from here.”

1702-1703 When His Majesty* lieatd this he said:

+O distinguished man of expetience! To me you

Yourself are more pleasing chan the presents. Craving

for the worldly things is the habie of mean fellows.”

1704 Then His Majesty? ordered three robes of
honour for him at one and the same time.

166 FUTOHU'S SALATIN

Sultin Mutizen'ddin conceals Quibu'ddin Asbak under
the throne and summons the schemers who bad
made allegations agesnst. bi

1705-1706 Tam told chat the prudent Aibak sured
not ftom rhe king's side that night. The whole might
the king and he talked over e2th other's affats.

1707-1714 When the day dawued the king ordered
Aibak to hide Inmself beneath the throne. Then early
1m the morning, he held a levee joyfully from the chrone.
He summoned those foxy cunning schemers who had made
allegations against Aibak and said to thein,

*O accursed and wretched people, what do you
say tegatding Aibsk now? You should waite 2 cleat
pledge in yout blood binding yourself on this condition
that tf Aibsk comes hete by our order and fitman, the
bloodshed of exch one of you will be permissible and
will go unavenged.’

171541720 When those schemets lieard this from the
enlightened king they gave the weiting in utter helplessnest
Thereupon che king ordered Atbak to come out from
beneath the throne. In comphance with the reyal order
Aibak came out invoking blessings ov, and ptesentiog
mmense pratses to, the king Wsth a hundred submissions,
he placed Its head on the ground—a sight which was
wimessed by all, fefrand ght On seeing this the said
schemers were confounded and regretted having gwen there
wauten pledge. Since the pledge staking their Ives had
been slready vereten, these remorse 3 of 10 avail.

1721 1725 However, the kang subsequently passed the
order saying:
“The Ulood of these schemers must be shed.’ At

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 167

hae moment, the generous Aibsk ditew himself at che
king's feet iu profound submission and said:

*Yout gracious Majesty I? Lee the lives of these
people be my prize, Alebough they have plotted
against my life and vexed Your Majesty's heatt yet it
would be better that you abstain from shedding their
blood in view of the fact that you ate a world-bestowing
and soul-noutishing king.”

1726-730 When the generous king noticed that Aibak.
hhad intereeded for them, he spared che lives of those
schemes and otdered that they should be exiled ftom
Ghazni, Then His Majesty said to Aibake: ‘O expetienced
and intelligent hero, mount a hotse instantly and ride
straight to yout camp. To-mortow at sunrise you must
come back quickly along with your atmy."

1731-1737 Next day befote sunrise the king ordeted the
geandees of the State advanee on loot, each with a befitting
ptesent for Aibsk and show him due tespeet. After sunrise
Aibak reached the capital, his stats. being in che highese
ascent. All men of distinetion nnder royal orders went on
foor fo a distance of two patasangs to receive him, When
hhe encered the eity, all walked in his train lest they should
incur royal displeasure.

1738-743 When Aibsk arrived in the royal precincts
and the king heard of his arrival from the court chamber
Iain, he said:

‘Let Atbak, pride of the wise men, eome riding in
the royal palace, He must not dismount except neae
the throne in the manner of fortunate kings,

Same as footnotes, 4,2 on page 165

168 EUTOHU'S SALATIN

1741-1742 On recermng this happy news from the
chamberlains, Aibak rode snto the palace. He found no
escape from the king's order and dismounted when he
arnved before His Majesty.

1743-2744 The king stood up co show him respect and
Aibak ran immediately towards bum, He kassed the king's
foot; and the king embraced him and began to scatter gold
Iuberally for lum by nay of performing msér.t

3745-1748 Then the king mounted the throne and
Aibak sat ona char, Every now and then the king
showed his affection for hum and bestowed many favours on
hun. He ordered the mahks aid gtandees to put up
decorations 1n honour of Atbsh. Sitting together both king
and Aibak made meray for a few dayss

1749-1751 Then His Mayesty ordered Atbakto go back
to Hindustin, He gave him many robes of honour aud took
many a solemn oath saying: ‘Even ifthe whole world
jotned tm one voice to decry Atbsk, I would never become.
suspicious of im again.”

Sutin Mu'vzen'ddin bm Sim marches for ibe fourth
time to Hundustin and achieves victory agernst Jes Chand
the Ras of Kanan

2752-1753 In the yeat™ 590 when spring breezes began
vwblow and everyone strolled into a garden the king of
Ghazni came into Hindustin.

3754-1756 When Atbak heard that the king had
marched is army again upon Hindustin, he took his

1 That athe king seatered gold with the object of protecting
‘Aiba from any mushap and also from the eect of evl eye,
2 AD.1194

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (0) x6

roops out of Kubrim and met che hing on the way and
performed pibor. He submuced to His Majesty all che
accounts tem by tem—nuhitary expenditure as well as the
revenuts of the country.
173771769 He placed many presents before the hing
and received much royal appreciation ‘Then he sauds
*O hing, refuge of the world 1 1 have captured
many fortresses in Hendustia and uprooted many athorn
from his garden. But chere has still remained an old
thorn which has been a hundtance an this garden, That
thorn is the accursed Rit of Kanan called Jat Chand
who possesses an army that has exceeded the Inmmts of
caleulation. He has elephants ihe mount Albutz in
large numbers and many well-equipped and magoificent
atmies, From the sea tothe boundaty of Sind the rayis of
Hindustdn have gitded up there loins in hus services He
4s superior to all the Hindi Rais and is acknowledged
astheir head, If that thorn were removed from this
garden, the countey of Hindusiin would become outs
Since the royal standards have arrived here tas fit that
the troops should march against bin. In this expedition
Your Majesty may put me im the vanuatd, by yont
royal grace I shall break Ins army. Your Majesty may
simply watch how quickly Aibak moves in the matter,

1770-1773 When the king heard thus from Atbak he
appreciated lumn and approved of his proposal, The follow-
ing day, at suntise, he and the well-theaning Arbik led the
troops against Kanauy When the troops arrived in the con
fines of Chandwal,* Jar Chand took hus army out of Kanauj.

177471783 I am cold that the upryhe Atbak ised to go
fone stage altead of the king. When he —a strategtst and 2

a0 FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

-eeacless vietor in war—reached Chandwil,t he met
Brahman whom he asked to narrate the story of bis Rit
and ssid: Where are the stmy chieftains? Where 1s rhe
army2, Where s the Rit of this acea and country? The
Behan bowed mn profound humibatioa and sa

‘O enemy-hunting Turk, the army is at a distance

of two parzsangs from here For the past ewo days, the
country-eonquering Jat Chand has encamped 1n the open
field, A festval 1s being exlebeared in Hindustin ; three
days of us eelebration soll cemain, The Hindus ate
holding a f&te everywhere and all ate immersed 1n the
acean a€ yoy end pleasuce. They ace engrossed with
einking co such an extene that not a single man
would you find alert.
1784-179 When Atbak heard tlus from that Hund, be
summoned all his comrades and said
*O chiefs, no one remains sm the world for ever,
borring hun who makes a name in a holy wae by lying
down tus life in bateefield berotcally Irke Rustam If
hhete and now, yot set your hearts on this fight and give
ame Your unrestricted support. we will ecush rhe enemy
troops, we will sake our lives in wat. We will steip
thus cegion of the tnfidels and cemove the theen {com
the garden of Hindustia, We will ratse the banners
of slim ro the polae star like the acmy of Mustafa Lake
heroes we will eaen a name by showing magnanimiy
and will enjoy this woeld as well as che nese”
1793-1798 I am told when Aibsk gave rhis advice
tentatwely to the ariny ebncfeans, che dissinguisied Heurmnsh,

2 [6 Chandwal which 13 wleanfied with modea Firorabad
‘on the Juma between Agra and Erawaht

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) an

fon behalf of these chieftains, gave a sutble answer
to chat victorious commander, He was a close confidant
of Aibak and a Turk of lucky stars whom Atbak had
purchased under the King’s? order and who bad in the
presence of the king! wiclded the sword valiantly against che
Kbokbar® and whom the kang liad given special robes of
nonour many 2 time for he had displayed lierossm 1n every

3 Le Mu'uzu'ddin Muhammad Ghorr ‘sian has used the
term sbaben sbab and abeb andwseminately for him.

2° Le Mo'zu'diin Muhammad Ghots

3. The Kbobbers—crroneously wlennfed by Furshta aod Eliot
with the Ghakksrs, inhabitants of regions northward of Multin
CENR vol up 477)—lived primaly in the lower hulls of
Kashmir Tobetson (PC Dl p, 172) considers them as an offshoot
cor exste of « Raypur cube of che Panyab inbeburing the Sind sfgar
Dosb and some regious oorthewest of Multan, They ste alto
ulentifed with the Jats The Khokbars who slign themselves
either with che Rajputs nor with Jats are found 1a Rewalpindt
distnet and Moltia division

‘On the whole the Khokhers wete # warnot tribe sharing the
rfitaty babies of the Rejputs and Jats, As early as AD, 1008
they mode themselves eoospieuous by yining the armies of the

ndu confederacy which had been formed to renst Sultsa
Mahaid’s evasion of Peshiwar When tbe later Ghaznan kings
became weak rt was these Kbokbars who supported them in thete war
with Muhzzu'ddin Muhammad bin Sim When in 58t Hyca
(AD 1185) the latter appomnted ‘Inzu'ddin Hussin Klaemol
commandant of the fortess of Sulkot and himself returned to
Ghezo, Khusrat Mable tbe Gbaznavid kang marched at the head of
ao army of Khokhars and other kandred warriots on Sialkot and
beneged it. But he was unable to take at TNR vol 1p 455

‘sams means to say bat the Khokliats had presented oppose
tion to Mu'uzu'ddin Muhammad on Indian soil, and in ehis
connection recills the muliaty service rendered by lnutmul, prow


a FUTOHU'SSALATIN

battle. He was a Turk whom Aibsk had adopted as his
on and whom the king* had given a writ of axanumission,
What 2 wonderful slave he was! He had sceured his
sranumission before that of hus master Arbak, through God's
grace.

¥799 1805 In short, after the victorious Aibak had
spoken to his troops and given them 2 moral discourse at the
place where the idolarer liad met Iisn, Iltutmish the demon-
captorer, addressed him saying:

To-day tt os we and che field of bate, We shall
crush the enemy contingents completely. Like lions we
shall not withdraw before the elephants; like experts we
shall gird our loins to fight. We shall make an assault
‘on the Rat of Hindustin and will eaptute the outskirts
of this garden. We will set Fire to the infidels’ abodes
and will exhibit stim in this country.

1806-1812 When Ieutmish ssid this to Aibak, Aibak’s
hheart blossomed like a lowers and other chieftains also
showed their readiness to stake their lives. As for Aibak
the moved his horse from there with the intention of giving
battle. Sometimes he galloped and sometimes he trotted
fill he fell upon the enemy contingents in great fury, attend=
ced by his own troops wieh unsheathed swords. All made an
onslaught upon the enemy's ranks and kalled many of them.

baby in the course of Mvvizzo'ddia Mubaramad's Gghe with che
Khokhars, fot, accoediog t Minha} (Op. Cu. p. 483), the Kho
Khare, combined with ocher secaltant and warlike tubes of the
Iullsto che north of Libor, bad raised a revole and Muticzu’ddia
Muhammsd came dowa from Ghazni to crush thele rebellion,

“'y Same as footnote 2 on p. 374


SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 73

Notfora moment did the warrior Tucks give che Indian ranks
respite in that field of battle, They broke rhem left and tight.

3813-1819 Iam told thae the Indisn Rat vanished 1m
such a manner im the courrse of baile that hardly could
anyone find a trace nf lum. Perhaps he lay wounded
among the slain, Not even one from among the enenues
‘went alse from that place since the Tucks pursued them
everywhere, billing all, Inylt as well as well as low, and
seizing their entire belongings. Seven uundred and odd
number of elephanes fell into che hands of the victors,
The amoung of booty they setzed, | am at a loss to esumate,
In the night, they encamped m that very place and
drank wine to the accompaniment of music,

1820-1823 Next day, the Ghort kung arrived and
Ireatd about the victory that Atbak had achieved so expedi-
tuously, He was amazed ar his superiority and embraced
Jum anmdst_s hundred applanses, Then he gave him a
speeal robe of honour and kused his hand affectionntely.
He also ordered robes of honour for fleutmish and other
cehuefeains

3824-1827 Next day the king said to Arbak

“O counry-conquering elnef, since you have
distinguished yourself in plundering the enemy, you
may rad wherever you please, the booty will be
yours You have crushed the ranks of the Rit Riyin
of Hindustin. You should entertain no fears of other
Indian clvefs Capture this Tand and country from
end to end, annibilae che accursed anfidels'2

3828-3833 When the king spoke thus to Aibsk,
Aubak invoked benediettons and replied

x Thats, Jaichand of Kanauy,

”" FUTOHU'SSALATIN

"Your Majesty! What service can I render?

What can my hand aclueve at the time of battle? 1

am one of the slaves of Your Majesty. Irs your

royal favour thet has made me commander of
the army. Te was by the power of Your Majesty thie

1 apeang on the enemy eroops and achieved victory.

‘Wharever success I have been able go achieve 1s but a

reflection of the shadow of your banners. As for

myself, I do not possess poner even to overpower 2

contingent of ants.”

1834-1836. Afterwards Mutwzu'ddia the generous
ang gave Aibah a spectal tobe and posted Im tn Hindus
Sn as bus viceroy, then he returned to Ghoznf which lie
reached after some time,

1837 From Ghsznt he did ot move for three of four
years, Lam told,

1838 1839 Later he cook the stmy to Tas in which
tegion he remained for a year, The region of Sorakhs? and
the terutory of TAst became prosperous like a bride by
virtue of the josice that he admunutered.

1840 1842 Every month he made fresh rads
those paris, aided by is good fortune, and overran
the area to ts extremities, and every expedition of his was
aended with the capture of a new ett), He put

1 An old town between Mashhad snd Marv, demsreatiog the
froaner between modern Tean and Russia on th~ lower course of the
Hlanad or the ever of Herat

2 Tuswas thename of 2 dutnerm Kbirsiaa, lying so the
‘upper part of the aver of Herat, Te was destoyed 19 391 Hues
(AD, 1380) and on rs ruins arose the modern town of Mashhad or
Meshed

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 5

the recalenrants to the rack and gratified the men of
religion,

News of the death of Glryisu'ddin Mubammed bmn

Sim recches Mu'vzzu'ddin Mubammed Sim and the

Lungdom of Ghor 1s entrusted to Ghiyigu'ddm Mabmind
son of Mubammad Sim

1843-1845 One day, wlule the king was in high
repose there came a courier from the Ghor country. In
uteer desperation, he performed the king's pibar and pro-
duced a lerter in black border. Then distegarding che
chamberlains, he advanced to che king and banded over
to bum che leter tn teats

1846 1854 When the king tcoh st from his hands
he was dismayed, seeing us borders entirely black. In
great anguish, he broke the seal of thae letter with his own
hands. As he poted over 1t, his eyes shed teats of blood,
When he read che contents through, he tote his _gatment,
heaved a sigh and threw che eap from his lead to the
ground Crying, he fell down fom the throne and
reiterated every moment amidst loud lamentations:

‘The strength of the fortune of my high posttion
1s broken, destiny has now tied the hands of my pros-
penty. GhiySsu'ddin—that king of the woeld—is no
more. There 1s nothing in the world but mourning
now. Without him the throne of Ghor lies vacant,
Where 1s vow the wealth and power of the house of
Sim? From the world has departed that son of Simm,
who was the torchlight of the Sim family *

1855-1861 In short, the heart of the king of Ghaznt
became so afflicted on account of the death of lus brother

476 FUTOHU'S.SALATIN

that for a week he did not show his face to the army.
Alter one week, that magnanimous king took the army to
Ghot. He suppressed disorders in that region and gave
at to Mahmid, son of the deceased king, whom he found
fit for the throne and granted hum the title of Gliy3s'ddin
and said.

I have made you ruler over the tersitory sttetch=

{ng from Bust* up to Merit. Acquit yourself well 1m

this territory and endeavour like your father to adminis

ter justice.

1862 1864 Afterwards, he bestowed on Nasitu'ddin
Salyule (eelug), who was hus sister's son and im whose
forehead he read a promise of future greatness, the ternitory
of Hicit, Then His Majesty returned from the agti* of
Ghor to Ghazni,

Story of dismusal of Mubemmad Bakbtyer Kbalff from
Ghazni, bus proceeding towards India and captaring the
territory of Lakbnents

1865 1867 I have heard from the Indian hisrotians
that when affet hts terumphant Indisn expeditions, the king,
of Ghazni went back ro his capital, he ordered that the
atmy be reviewed and a parasol be raised in an open fild.

1868-1871 Tayu’ddin Yalduz, the adopted son of His
Majesty and paymaster of the royal army, cartied out the
royal ordet. He atcanged things an such a manner that
all the offcers and ranks might be reviewed 1n the course
of one day. From dawa till the ‘esr prayer, the royal
‘conningents were reviewed completely.

4 Acld town of precslamic fran which stood on the left bank.

cof the Helaund 1m Sutan,
2 That 1, four to five o'dack an the afternoon,

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 27

1872-1873 The review over, Yalduz, destroyer of the
base, ordeted all the registers to be elosed.

1874-1878 After the registers had been closed, thete
came an officer, namely the stubborn Mubsinmad Bakhtyley
hhero of the Khsli tribe, His case was then reported to
Yaldus in these words: “An army officer has arrived late
after the registers have been closed everywhere, What is
yout opinion of this man, exalted chief? Must we re-open
some registers for his sale?!

1879-1881 When Yalduz heatd this he was annoyed
to such an extent that his face blushed, and he blurted out:
‘Such a man, who does not co-operate with my army even
fn the review, must be dismissed and his name sttuek off
the registers ioimediately."

882-1890 Tam told that the clerks eaneclled his
ame forthwith under order of the dignified ruler. This
done, that adventurous chieftain lefe Ghuent the same day
together with his attendants and journeyed over to
Hindustin, When he eam: into this garden he—that
hhero of pute faith—wanted to proceed to Chittor in
erder ro seeve under Rit Jal Singh and later to become
ruler of that fortress by trickery. Ulrimately his inind
changed. He gave up that fooluh idea and resolved
upon a better and sounder plan. Suddenly, he dashed

his horse from Chiteor and advanced right in the direction
of the country of Gaut Then ike a flash he advanced
imo the outskirts of Lakhaautl in order to lay hands on ic.

891-1894 Lam told thar Muhammad entered that

region in the guise of merchants who wander about the

1 Literally ‘prince’
2

8 FUTOHU S-SALATIN

world from end to end, This news was conveyed to
Lakhmuya and be was tnld that a merchant from Sistin had
Fought much precious merebandise—many horses from
Tartary and China silk and rare commodittes—from all
parts of the world.

1895-1897 Immedately as Lakhmiya) who was the
ruler ofall those regians, heard ehis he rode out of his palace
fn ordet to buy some thing of every country. He didnot
know that this amorous world had sectetly designed to
play another game.

1898-1901 In short, when the Rat came out of rhe
palace, he advanced rowatds the caravan, When he reached
the caravan, Muhammad ranged before him many precious
things But he had previously made a plot and accordingly
beckoned to his comrades so that they might draw closer
ftom all sides and make a target of the Rat's mens

1902-1907 As soon as the Turks laid theit hands
on the Rii's men, the Rat's troops faltered and were defeate
ed, However, some of them stood by the Rit, and,

1 Te Lakshman of the Sen dynasty chen an old. man, hnng
vs his capil Nadiys—a towa situated at the head of the Gangenc
delta In 1202/598 Ikbuyaru'ddn bin Baldtyar Rlalp marched,
proceeding. from Bltar sto Nadiys with an escort of eighteen
fhorsemen only They passed as horse desler ight anto the town
‘unt they reached the Ray's galce, There, hy means of a comp,
ates they tool posession nf everything valusble, sod Raya
Lilshman Sen who was thea engaged in talang mess, lee the
place by the backdoor which opened an Hie rivet, He took the
boat for Vikeampur, neat Sonargion ight miles south-east af
Dacca tkbuyfeu'ddin bin Bakbuyar Khalj proceeded to Gaur
(Lakkinaut) where he bad the Ehathe reed ia the name of
‘Mutzzu'ddin Mubammsd Gher,


SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 49

ranging themselves around him, they foughe against the
dreadful Turks. For a while they grappled with theenemy
and put up a stffresstanee, But in the end, the brave
wartiors of the Khshi tbe made a powerful windlike
attack; and aftet they had killed those few Hinds cavalry
men, the Rit fell 2 prisoner into che hands of Bahbtyie:
Mohammad became king in that region with a separate
capital for Ins dominion.

1go8-1g0g 1 am told chat, from Lakhnauti to Chins,
that man of faith made Istim known, Aided by his good
fortune and the strength of Islim, he captuted many ctowns
and elicones,

1910-1914 Whoever ts aided by good luck, God
grants him suecess in the world, and he who has opened the
eyes of his mind pays no heed to worldly affaus. Since
he attsins the perfection of intellect, he becomes 2
conspicuous man of accomplishments so much so, chat,
when he touches the earth 1¢ wwrns anto gold and every=

4 This asa reference to the fact that Ihbuy3eu'ddia bin
Bakluyie Khali carried his arms beyond the Himalayas He
established Muslion power among the Mongol tnbes of Koch,
Mech sad Kachert, It appears tbat some of them beeame eonverts,
One of these “Ali the Mech by name took Ikhuyscu%ddin bin
Bakhayar Ashu snto the Tibet which the latter atzempted to cross,
But he fled and retested from an unknown stage tn his expedie
tuon, The taja of Kanirup witb whom he had previously made a
treaty beteayed bum and fell on his teteeating army, thtowing many
of them anto the ner. Ikhryara'ddin bin Bakhtyée Khaly: managed,
on crosning the river, to reach Lakbnauti but died, shortly after,
overwhelmed mith shame This took place n 602 H (A.D. 1106),
Teas lio said that he was matdered by 2 Khalj soldier, “Alt Merdaa
hy name


180 FOTUHU'S-SALATIN

thing becomes available co hum. He can always snare
the bied of prosperity and can ever walk steadily m the
field of atearoment

1915-1931 Come and lee us walk cate-ftee and un-
rescevedly like religious men into this cavern and let us buen
completely every worldly ching that we possess. Lee us be
content with a sifi garment, and that «5 all, We should
walk snto this path freely like a gallesb! so that we might
bbe relieved of the wornes of the world, We should eat
what we have got and have no worries. In this mannet
wwe shall pluck the frure of che world’s garden, Every
‘motning we should walk an this gueden for pleasure 19 the
manner of drunkards. As soon as we become entapruted
by the charming sight of chis garden and happy lke «
blooming flower of the motning we should considet that
tls ts the only tune for enjoyment, because the sky and che
‘earth are always planning co desttoy us

1922-1923 Coine, O cup-bearer, serve us with » round
‘of cups ftom che wine of mystery, which might reduce
the earth to a drop and the sky to a bow! Give us suel
wine that from its very first cup the difference between
the sky and earth mighe disappeat for us.

Sulton Mutizza'ddin Mahammad-s Sam merches toward
Kbwartem ond Balk, and while returning diverts to the
coutlysng parts of India and 15 martyred

1924 1927, Lam told that Mu'iezu'ddin, son of Sim
‘was enjoying fnmselE an the agt@ * of Ghazni when 1 the

4 Quiles stnds for a qalandar—a cate-eze person—with
shaven head who abandons eveeything even the fainly, fucnds and
ppotsessions, and wanders 1a the world an search of Truth

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (I) 285

year! 601, be again mobilized an army from Ghazni. He
weot to Khwartzm and returned quickly. Three of four
months after this, he led an army fom Ghzzeni to Balkh
and shed the blood of many an infidel Turk.

1928-1932 Tam told tha he killed many of them tn
battle and the survivors made peace at last, From there he
went to Hinausting and from its farthest frontier he eurned
back with his troops cowards Ghazaf, When he arrived
at the ominous Dacuik? station a heretic (mulbid)® suddenly
struck a sword on bis head during reception time, So
octal a wound was inflicted on hum that he depateed for
the garden of paradise,

1 AD, 1204

2 This ws Damzysk or Danub. Islay on the bank of the
Todus, and Mu tzzu'ddin Muhammad Ghort was murdered here by,
8 malbrd, TNR. p. 485 and TN BL, p, 124

3 Mu'zzu'ddin Muhammad Ghon's footsteps were being
dogged hy some heretics (mulabid); and he was assassinated 10 the
course of us maghnub prayer hy a group of them, Cf. Tep't
Ma'igr (Ms, AS. No, 110,p.439) It 13 also said that the
sssasinators were Khokiars, for the Khokhars too might be
called mulshud of malabste (TNR, p. 106) The term roulbrd,
rmulabid 0 malabid was chen used for the Qaramita heretics aod
the Fudats of the Biginya Isms'da sect, The Qaramutas were the
mortal enemies of Muftzzu‘ddsn Muhammad hia Stm who had been
at war with them Head driven thera out of Muleia in 571
Hyea (A.D _ 1171) aod out of Khurisin mn 575 Hyea (AD. 1175)-

Finshts holds a group of rweoty Ghakkars responsible for the
murder of Mu'tzzu'ddio Mohamad hin Sim, Ie said that one
‘of them assaulted aod killed the gate-heeper and the remaining
otneteen cut open the royal teot aod fell on the Sultan and tortured
tum to death, inflicting on bum tweoty-two wouods in successi0
CLE, vol 1p 196)

Hodivala cootends hat Firubta musuolerstood the *t=the


aa FUTOHU'S-SALATIN

1933 He ruled over Ghazm for thirty-two years and
a whole world? was trampled by Ins army.

1934 The seven climates sang lus praises, the whole
of Hindustin beeame the home of Islam through lum,

1935 Verily, he was a king, gentle and forbearing,
possessing solid poner and healthy ambition

1936 He owned two thousand fierce elephants and
spent the whole of lus Ife an Fighting

1937-1938 One day, I am told, the said king enguited
of his pious treasurer saying “Tell me bow much hoatd
and pearls you have in ele creasury «

1939 1943 The teeasurer who bore the name of Ismail
said an reply

"Your Majesty, the amount of hard eash 1s beyond

cealevlinon, One dy, I weighed the diamonds whic

were of greater value tban esery ether Kand of jewels ©

their weight amounted t@ 1,500 maunds, let alone the

‘gold and fine royal jencls Now, O jewel discriminating

emperot, you may form an estimate of other kinds

of wealth’,

Fiday mentioned 1a the Nwtbes [eben dre of Qu Ahmad
Ghafan weeen 1a 972 Hyes (AD 1562) and replaced at by
‘Ghaldar SIMH vol 4 p 183

1 Mskiog some allowance for ‘Tsam’s pocne exaggeration 1
muy be snd chat Murzru'ddia Muhanad Ghoti's Indian con
‘quests mncladed Moltan, Uch, Labore (Labor), Peshawar (Parsbor)
Sulkot, Ayer, Hans Sutsatt Rubra, Muth, Kol, Del Bians
(Toanko) Budsuo, Kasse (Kennan), Kehoyar, Avadb, Malvay
parts of Bihar and Lakboases

Oueside India bus conquests were—Marr, Nubapue, Tos
Bawatd, Ns, Shinstasah Sabrwar, Jenabad, hbwanz, Andkbud
andhob t]ud TNR p 4gt


SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 383

1944-1945 Alter all, though he eapcured a world and
performed many a marvellous deed, he too departed from
this world. While dying, not a farthing (jen) had he in
his hands,

1946-19 48 In the course of the yeat! 602 he journeyed
back from this mundane earth. From the world be took
nothing with him excepe a good name. One, who dies
such a death, fs not dead. It appears that on departing
from this hanqueting-house, he joined a pleasure-party
in another garden (paradise).

1949 Wherever there is a man of piety, the world
cherishes his memory at dawn,

1950-5 Come, O cup-beater, pout into my eup the
wine, which has been sifted through the aromatic wind of
muskepod at a time when intelligent men prefer co attain
the state of intoxication in an abode of tulips,

2 AD, 1205

COMMENTARY

The opening verses in this chapter hold up to view a
weak executive and an enervated monarchy resting of the
army chiefs and subject to the diseases snherent 1n petsonal
despotism,

In the foreground are seen two of Sultin Mahmid’s sonst
Marid and Muhammad, both at foggetheads, Bubagi?
tells us that Mastid was the elder brother and tad been
tppomted heapparent® in 4o6/1016. Later he was

1 Sulla Mahmoud bad sven 100, nomely Mavud, Mohimmad,
Sslumis, lark, Ne, Iban ad “Abés'rRashé While fre
sf thei ad ded dunng the hfeume of Mahmu2, eno suraved
tim, namely Marud and Mobsrtnad bere 1 groctl minundet=
standing dat May'0d was younger and Muhammad wat the elder
bother (Cf Iqbal, A D—Wdvats Fabang, Tek Tebean 3324
SH p 8)

2" Abst Feel Mebimnmad commonly oon sx Bihag wat =
Persun hutonan ofthe. sth/aih cenory”" He nas born n 383,
995 nthe dinner of Duihaq, pow ealkd Sabrndt a hors
Edscated at the jnu's (uneasy) of Nabipur he ented opal
sermce a the eout of Sulfa Mahima of Geen while yeti bs
tncaeed royal dplenare donog the regn of Abdu'eRasd,griod=
son of Sulla Mahinud and was ampnoocl Alter the death of
“Abu's Rashed when be was cested, be dd not resume the royal
sevice He took to weting hatry abd produced » voluminous
tasty ofthe royal Seana dypany m thy weer He ded
w a7efee7] El wel up n30

3 TBA. 7


SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 185

superseded! by his younger brother Muhammad whose name
was inserted in the Bhutba under orders of Sultin Mahmid.
‘And Mastid was sent away to Isfsbin® lest, on beg.
present in the capital he should create trouble at any critical
moment, But he won the favour of the army chiefs; and
with their suppore obtained the throne after a fight in which
Muhammad was defeared, eaptured and thrown asa prisoner
into a fort in the province of Tukbiristin, cast of Ballch.

Baihagi who is a contemporary authority for che reign of
‘Mas‘id, also ells us that Khwaja Hasan Maimandi who had
been imprisoned by Sulgin Mabmiid was released by Mas‘aid
and the larter appointed him wazir. His wath, however, fell
fon the exwazit HIssank who was suspected of disloyalty.
And, on the plea that he had poisoned the mind of Sultin
Mabmid, Mastid had him stoned to deaths and bis dead
body, stuck at the gibbet, was held up to public view for
seven years.

Ve follows, that che empire of Ghazni now lose thar
integrity and vigour which had characterized it under
‘Mabmid, And ‘Isimt enables us to see how it was ripped
up by the Saljugs, and how ie was set upon by the Ghuzz
from the north and by the Ghoris feam the south, The Saljuqs
who had started making encroachments during the lifetime
‘of Mabmad" became stronger after his death and made

1 Minhaj ays that Sulgia MahmGd was envious of Mas‘ad
and teeated him wich harshness and sevetity T.N.R.,p.
2 Miah mys ‘When Malini subdued “edq ‘Ajan he
boetowed the throne of that territory upon Mas'ad and later
appointed um governor of Isfabin, Op. ct, p. 33
3 TBA. pp, 265-478
4. Op. it. 207-238


186 FUTOHU'SSALATIN

moment Balkh, at another Mav and at another still Herit
and Nusipiz, Finally they inflated 2 erushing defeat on
‘Mas‘ad at Dandangint sn the year 42/1040 and seized
some territories including 2 part of Khutisin. The successors
cof Mastad took to propitiating the Ssljuqs, Sultan Ebrahim
‘marred his son ‘Aliu'ddaula Mastad Ill to the daughter of
Malik Shih Saljdqi. In spite of thus, Malik Shah's son
Sanjar Sslyaqi carted fire and sword into Ghazni and also
‘occupied Ghor. Arsilin, a son of “Alau'ddaula Mas‘éd I
accepted defeat and retired to Lahos. His brotber Babriom Shik.
‘vas favoured by Sanyat who enabled hin to recover the
throne of Ghazni, But the Ghaznavi monarehiy now becsme
4 dependeney of the Saljiq_ empice, and Sultin Sanjae had
‘nis own name engraved on the coms of Ghaznt. Howevery
Sanjar was the last powerful Saljiq emperor. With his
death im 552/1157 began the disintegration of his vase
empire which lad embraced Turkistin, ‘Transoxiana,
Khurisin, “lig “Ayam and Asia Minor. Qn its ashes arose
new Turkish groups and dynasties—the Atabeks of Iciq,
Aaabiyin and Hamadin, the Qurakhatais of Turkustdn, the
Qurlughs of Transoxtana, ele Khvarizm-Shahis of Khiva, the
Ghozz of Dalkh and the Shansabanis of Ghor, Figlitmg
‘commenced among all these, each trying to drown the otler.
But the Ghuzz of Balkh, the Khwirtzm Shalus of Khia
and the Shansabamis of Ghor set ehetr hearts on seizing, the
few territories that had sull cemnained under the nominal
‘ule of the successors of Sulsin Mhmid of Ghazut.

The Ghuzz who had been akin to the Saljugs and

4 Dandagia was an amportant town south west of Mary on
“the road to Ssrakbe,

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 87,

had sewed in Khurisia during the reign of Sanjar tevoleed
against him and defeated and captured him in 541/2253-
‘Then they seized Ghazni and drove out Khusrau Shih to
Lalor. Ghazat remained under the Ghuzz over a decade,
From them it was scized in 569/1173 by GhiySsu'ddin
‘Mubaminad hin Sim of Ghor who made ic over ro his
younger brother Shihabu'ddin, installing him as king of
Ghazni with che tide of Mutizzu’ddin?

Now the way was clear for the Ghori brothers
to rear an empire, hue the Khwitizm-Shabis? and the

1 Ch, verses 1296-1312 supra

2 Temay he noted that Khwitizm Shah was the title conferred
by Sulit Sanjar Saljaqion Qushu'ddin bin Noshtigin, an old
slave of the Salfiqi hotse whom he had appointed governor of
Kbwitisms, Eventuslly Quibu'ddia Khwitizm Shih founded 2
dynasty which became known as Khwirizm-Sbibi dynasty with
Khwitiom and Marv as their capitals. Hissuecessor Awiz was
defeated and dtiven out of Khwirizm by Sanjar in 533/2°38.
Bur he reasserted himself and recovered Khwicizm; and for the
succeeding nine years (533/,1138-542/2147) there was a bard
fight between him and Sanjac, Afterwards when Sanjat was made
‘captive hy the Ghuzz in Khurista Atuiz invaded Khortsin pretend-
ing to rescue Sanjar. On his return to Khwiciem he continued
goawing at the Sulsiq empire steadily. As a result, by the time of

is death which occurred ia 55111156 Atsic was master of ce

of Transoxiane and Khutisiq, His son and successor IleAcsalaa
continued this forward policy. He met with opposition from
the Ghuzz bur defeated them ia Gurgia and Dibistin
be annexed the Ghuzz terttaies of (fds and Nishipi also
he exploited the weaknesses and mutual quartels of the Qa
‘Weansexiana and the Khia of Samarqaad, aad thecchy increased
his influence in Transoxiana (53/1359). This gave provocation to
the Qiskhitsis who invaded the KbwitizmShahi dominion ia
$87/3172. For the strong opposition encountered hy the Ghat


388 FUTOHU'SSALATIN

Ghuz2" presented a strong opposition. OF these ewo enemies
the Khwictzm Shabas proved more venomous. Ie 2 true that
Ghuyigu'daian Muhammad bin Sim who aspired to emulate
the great Sslyuq emperors and bad planned a Shansabimia
empice of Ghor conquered many eerritones of the Ghuzz
aswell ss those of the KhwittzmShalus, But wbile the
Gbuzz snake had spent ats venom consuming stself during
Is Ifeume the Khwatuzm Shiki snake continued exhaling 1ts
venom even after it had stung Ghiydsu'ddin Mubamraad
bin Sam, a3 12 shown below.

Te should be remembered that II-Arsalin of Khwinzm
had left behind ewo sons Takish (568/162 596/1199) and
Sulgan Shih (567/1171-589/1199) who were rivals and
lose contestants for supremacy. Takish who was eldet
took forcible possession of the Saljugt ternieory of Khurasan,
Hamidia, Isfahan and Ruy as well as of slrak.? His younger

hrother from the later Khwinzm Shahus see the suceechng parte
raphe sn the hody of this commentary.

+ Regarding the stiong oppontion of the Glues 1 sbould be
noted that ‘Alsu'ddi Jabasioz of the Skanssbanse house of Ghor
snbo had conquered may tertitones of the Saljugi—HerSt, Bay
aod Tolsk and the region between the Helmund and. Han Rud
fnverscompasiog Basan, Tokbarsta, Jarum Bast, and Ghaquta
wes defeated by the Ghure and lov t them Heat, Balkh and
oklanscan In 557/1263 he was succeeded by his son Su’édia
‘Muhammad who recovered Herat from the Ghaze hut died (558/,
162) while advancing agunm chemin the duecuoa of Ball
CCoonuering thi «good omen the Ghose saade a dah for Ghszm
which they seized the sae yee

2 ‘Teak—aodern equivalent of “rag "Ajson—wat the sane of a
politcal diraioa of Tein eoiaed by the geographers of the eghth
entary Hiya Thar divmion eomproed tertones tea par


SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 189

brother Sulgin Shih qoatrelled with him and a civil war
broke out. Ac last Sulein Shah went to Ghor soliciting
help from Ghiyigu'ddin Muhammad bin Sim in order to
capture Khurisin. The latter gave no help. Sultin Shah,
disgruntled, went to Turkistin where he allied himself wich
the Qirackhitais, With their help he was able to secure a
part of Khurisin comprising Marv, Sarakhs, ‘Tis and
Nishiptr. Thus his ambition was spurred; and having.
secured a new ally in Baliiu'ddin Tughsil, the Saljiqi gover-
anor of Herie, he matched upon Ghor and foughe a bate
neat the river Marv with Ghiygu'ddin Muhammad bin Sain
fn 586/1190. The latter who was assisted in this battle by
hhis brother Mu‘izzu'ddtn. Muhommad Ghost and his king
men sad vassals—Shamsu'ddin Muhammad govetnor of
Bimiin and Téjv'ddin Harab governor of Sistin and
Quybu'ddin Aibsk*—defeated Sulsin Shah, Sulgin Shah fled
in the direction of Mary but his ally Babau'ddin Tughtil of
Heri was captured and killed, and his head was presented
to Ghiyigu'ddin Mukjammad bin Sim at Firoz Kolts ln this

manner Herit was annexed to the Shansabinia empite fu

from centeal Irin and partly from those of western Trin of chet ages
They ealled fe“eSq *Ajam in order to di
tamia—the land between che rivets Tigris snd Euphratesmhich
was called “Iraq *Aeab; and the sameis “leg proper in. modern
geography.

The teem ‘rag ‘Ajam continued to be used ell the inauguration
of the Iranian constitution in 5324 Hija, Then the old names of
the provinces of Trin were replaced by the signiffeant term astin;
and asa corollary to this the old name ‘Teiq *Ajam fell into disuse,

1 Teis seated that Qutbu'ddin Aibak was then employed asa
newandof the royal stable ae Gbemst. But the statement hat
remained unconfirmed,


383 FUTOHU'SSALAJIN

Ghuz2! presented s strong opposttion. OF these two enemies
the KhwirizmShahus proved more venomous. Te is true that
Ghiyigu'ddin Muhammad bin Sim who aspired to. emulate
the great Salyiq emperors and had planned  Shanssbinia
empire of Ghor conquered many tecritoties of the Ghuzz
aswell as chose of che KhwieizmShatus, But while the
Ghuzz snake had spent tes venom consuming stself ducing
Jus Ifetime the Khwierzm-Shahi snake continued exhaling tts
venom even after ie had stung Ghiyisu'ddin Muhammad
bin Sam, as 1s shown below.

Te should be remembered that I-Arsalin of Khwinem
had Left Behind rwo sons Talush (568/2162 596/199) and.
Sulgin Shih (567/1171-589/1199) who weee swvals and
close contestames for supremacy. Talash who was elder
took forcible possession of the Saljugi territory of Khurasia,
Hamidi, Isfakin and Ray as well as of tledk,® His younger

brothers fons the Inter KhwdiiemShabs ste the sueeeedng parse
raps an the body ofthis commentary,

1 Regarding the strong oppesison of the Ghuss st should be
noted that “Alas'din Jabtosor of the Shansabania howe of Ghor
who had conquered many tertonies of the Saljqs—Herdt, Balk
tnd Tulsk and the region between the Helmund and Hat Rad
tivers comprising Bamian, Tukharstan, Jarum Bust, and Gharpscin
—was defeated by the Ghore and lot to them Herat, Bulb and
Tokhansein [a 557/116 he was succeeded by his son Saifu'ddin
‘Muhastmad who recovered Herat from the Ghuzz but died (558/,
1162) while advancing agaimt them in the ditecton of Balk
Connderig thea good omen the Ghuzz made a dash for Goszat
which they sized in the same yene

2 “Teak—odern equivalent of ‘tq “Ayem—was the nae of 2
polmeal divsion of Tn comed by the geographers of ehe eighth
ennury Hyet That division compased tersitonet taken portly

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 389

brother Sulkin Shih quateelled with him and a civil war
broke out. At last Sulsn Sh3h went co Ghor soliciting
help from Ghiyisu'ddin Mohammad bin Sim in order to
eapeure The latter gave no help. Suis Sal
disgeunuled, went to Tutkistin where he allied linvself wi
the Qirackhitais. With

help he was able to secure a
pate of Khurisin comprising Marv, Sarakls, Tos and
Nishipir. Thus his ambition was sputted; and having
secured 2 new ally in Bahio'ddin Tughsil, the Saljiqi gover-
nor of Herit, bre marched upon

Ghot and fought a battle
neat the river Moty with Ghipqu'ddin Molsmmad bin Siin
fn 586/190. The latter who was assisted in this battle by
his brother Mo‘izzu'ddin Muljammad Ghost and his kins-
men and vastals—Shamsu'ddin Muhsuunad governor of
Bamiin and Taju'ddin Harsh governor of Sistin and
Quybu'ddin Aibsk’—deteaced Sulsin Shah. Sulsin Shih Aled
in the diteetion of Maev but his ally BahSu'ddin Tugha of
Heri was captured and hilled, and his hiead was presented
to Ghiydsu'ddin Molyammad bin Sim at Firoz Kol ln this
manner Herit was annexed to the Shansabinia empire in

from central Irin and partly from those of western TeSa of that age,

They ealled i Ieéq*Ajam inorder to. dutinguish it from Mesopoc
tamia—the land between the rivers Tigris and Cuphrates—whieh
wat ealled “rag ‘Arabs and the same it
seegtaphy.

iq proper in modern

‘Iraq ‘Ajam continued to be ured ll the inauguration
n constitution in 1324 Hijra. Then the old names of
the provinces of Tein were feplaced by the i
and asa corollary to this the old ame "Tq *

3 Tein stated that Quibu'ddin Aibak was then employed
steward of the royal stable at Ghazi, But the statement
remained unconfirmed,


190 FUTOHU'SSALATIN

4586/1190 though according to another account, reproduced
by Raverry.! fe was in 57x71175 (fifteen years before the
batele of Marv) that Herit had become part of the
Shansabinia empire, the amuts of Hetit having voluntanly
offered submission to the satd Ghuyasu'ddin Muhammad bin
‘Sim who conferred the government of Herde on his vassal
‘Malik Shamsu'ddia with the url of Sultan and the privilege
of keeping chatr, Sulsin Shah died in 589/119" and his
possessions were immediately occupied by his brother Takish
who wasa biter enemy of Ghiyigo’ddin Muhammad bin
Sin of Ghor.

Takish was sell master of the whole of Khurisin and
also excreised sway over ‘Irik. He was extremely jeslous of
Is supreme position and sovereignty and would not allow
hhis Ghoti comtestants to make headway. A favourable
opportunity preseneed itself to the latter when Tahish died
fn 596/1200 and a civil war broke out between his son
*Aliu'ddin and grandson Hindd Khin. Ghy3gn'ddin
Mohammad bin Sint of Ghor marched his army readily
wo Khurisin and seized the territories of Nushipir,
Sarakhs and Tis, and Ins troops advanced into Juxjin,
Bistien and Koh
to the growing Shanssbinia empire.

Takish was succeeded on the throne of Khwirizm by his
son Soltin Quebu'ddin Khwinzm Shai who resumed wat

All these territories were annexed

1 Reveety reproduces this from Fah, He also points out
that Mish3) has at another place given 57% Hi as the year in which
erie was taken by the Ghor chef If so, would follow thot the
Ghons could not hold Heist for long, Peshaps Babiu'ddia
Toghnl seed i fom thems. In that cae slone the date 586/,
t1go can he tsken as correct, TNR, p 279,


SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) tor

with the Shansabinia empite and recaptured Tas, Nishipie
and Herit. Ghiy3su’ddin Muhammad bin Sim of Ghot
retaliated carrying fire and sword to the region of Tis and
Sarakchs; and successfully recovered Herdt, He was about
to recover the rest of Khurisin when te was suddenly
claimed by the Angel of Death (599/1202). His younger
brother Mu'izzu'ddin Muhammad Ghost who aseended the
throne immediately bad a shore reign of fout years, He was
murdered in 602/3206 and was succeeded by his nephew
Ghiyigu'ddin Mahméd, son of the deceased Ghiyigu'ddin
Muhammad, Under him the Shansabina empite whose
embtoynic lustce had spread for a few years fom the
Indus weswwatd to the boundary of ‘leq ‘Ayam and
from the siver Oxus to Hormuz on the Persian Gulf
dwindled ito a small kingdom under Ghiygu'ddin
Mahmfd, son and successor of the grest Ghidjgu'ddia
Mobammad, He had under his cule lusle beyond Ghot,
Ghizni and a liele patt of Khurisin and Hindustia; and
luis reign was shore. Thae ts five years after Its accession
hhe was killed by his own amues. His son Bahiu'ddin who
was then fourteen years old had hardly settled on the
throne when he was attacked by hts grand uncle “Aléu'ddin
‘Atsiz son of “Alsu'ddin Jabznsoz of Ghor. ‘The invader
‘Aliu'ddin Arsiz who was im the service of Sultin
‘Muhammad Qutbu'ddin Khwirtzm Shih then conquered
Firoz Koh, The young sulgin (Bahu'ddin) fled to Herat
where he was eaptured and ulumately drowned into a river
(607 /x210). “Aliu'ddin Atsiz who was the last heir of the
Shansabinia house ruled as king of Ghor for fout years
only. He was set upon by Tayu'ddin Yalduz, the
claimant of Ghszat and in the course of a battle that
followed he was lulled (611 /1234).

492 FUTOHU'SSALATIN

Such was the end of the stillborn Shansabania empire.
Nine years before the death of Alfu'ddin Atsiz! had
‘ended the careet of Mutzza'ddin Muhammad Ghoti,
He was killed at Damik on the bank of the Indus as
reported by ‘Isimi, He left behind no male heirs. But
hhe possessed tremendous energy and esoluteness which
hhe tmparted to hus mamluks—Qutbu'ddin Aibah,
Tayu'ddin Yalduz, Niseu'ddin Qubicha, Tkbtyiru’ddin
Muhammad bin Bakhtyie Khali and Teutmish. They
are said to have established Muslim cule in India, But
the credit must go to chete master whom Edward
Thomas depicts as ‘founder of the Pathan dynasty of
Debli®, While st ss a fact that there was no Pathan
dynasty of Dehli, Mutzzu'ddin Muhammad bin Sim
commonly known as Muhammad Ghoei was the de facto
founder of the first Turkish empire of Dehli.

He had reeewed a bitter legacy from his deceased
brother and stood after hts death watching ehe sell birth
ofthe Shansabinis empre. He marched iis army to
Gurgany, the Kbwirzum-Shait capital, and lard siege to it
bur had to withdraw before Its Khwirszm Shiht enemy
Quibutddin Khwieizm Shab? who had secured the help of,
dus Qu MST suzerain as well as that of hus vassls, the
Maliks and Khans of Teansoxiana. Theit Tartar ot
Turkmzer woops pursed Matzzu'ddia Muhammad bin
with his scanty

2 CPKD p10

3. Sir Wolseley fing gyves *Aliu'ddin Khwarrem Shab anstead,
Bot *Alau'ddia Khviniam Shah bad died an 596/1199, four yeas
Defore he battle of Andkbad ef, CHUL, p 43 ‘Alau'ddo
‘bwctem Shab a also ealed Takash sce p infra

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (I) 393

cavalry he was surrounded at Andkhtd! south of Sainarqand
and was competely routed in the year Gor/x20q. Asa
result, he lost all parts of Khurisin to his Khwirizem-
Shali conquerors and his prestige in India was shaken
and his reputation for invincibility vanished. Still be
id not lose courage; and on being allowed to retain
possession of Herie and Balkh he made an alliance with
Quibu'ddio, the self-same KhwirizmShahi king, in che
hope of fighting out the issue with is more dangerous
eoemies, the Quickhici Turks, He was able to capture
Tinmidh from chem and planned a large-scale fight with the
object of capturing Transoxiana when he heard of a serious
tising in the Panjab and was compelled to leave for India.
Defore his depareure he gave instructions to the vassal
governor of Bamign co eontinue making preparations for the
war that he liad announeed and would resume on his return
from fndia, He was not destined to return,

Ighont tells us that six years afeer ascending the throne of
Ghazni Mu‘izeu'ddia Muljanmad Ghott marched his army
into India, In Nahewalsh he fought a bale in 56/1179
with Jai Chand of Kanauj. The latter marehed at the head
of a large army, collected from different parts of Hindustan
to Gujarit; and fought a batrle which he won. Mu‘izzu’ddin
Muhammad Ghori who suffered a defeat returned to Ghazni
in the hope of colleeting a powerful army and retrieving his
honour. Bur there was no eneounter at all of Jai Chand of
Kanauj and Murizzu'ddin Muhammad Ghori in Naharwalsh.
The batde of Chandwil which ‘Isimt has noticed was the

+ Andkbid is spelt variously, and Barthold gives Andkhot as
present spelling,

B

94 FUTOHU'SSALATIN

conily batele that took place between the two in 91/1194,
not eather, Naharwila had been anvaded sixteen years before
(574/278), and the Ghoti troops marching by way of
MoltinUch and the Indian desert had encountered the
Raypur army, headed by the Vaghela raja of Guyatit near
Mt. Aba. The Ghorf troops were defeated; and Muhammad
Ghori rexurned to Ghizni. Then he changed hus course of
seton and decided, ynsead of proceeding agzinst the hostile
Hinda eluets, to conquer and annex the Muslim dominion of
the Panjab, He had alteady annexed Multi (571/175)
Now, he took Peshdwar in 575/1179, Siilkot in 58t/1#85
and Lahot in 582/186 Five yeats after this he marched
‘pon Bhatinds which was a Chauhin stronghold; and he
coecupied st in 587/2191. In the formess of Bhatinds he
ationed a gartuon of enelve thousand horses under the
ebage of a Tutlash officer ZiySu'ddin Tolakt Then he
sarted on fus eturn journey to Ghazni, But hacdly had
he proceeded in that diteetion when he heard of Prthve
‘22's approach and lus teadiness to recover Bhatinda, Imme-
diately Mu szzu'ddin Muhammad turned right round and
fought with the latter the battle of Tariio. He was
wounded in the arm and taken away from the battlefield
by a Kal soldier. He went back to Ghazni wa Lahor
where he stopped until Ins wound was healed.

‘On tus rerum ro Ghazni he was consoled by lus mother.

He pulled himself together and resolved ro march upon
India again. He collected a large army ol one Iskh and

thirty thousand cavalry:nen (one lakh and twenty thousand
as reported by Minhdj)—the choicest embodiment of the
‘Turkish warrior race. Ammdst them were Khirbak, Khirmil,

Albah, Yalduz, Qabicha and Makslbah, each commanding

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (I) 195

a contuigent of mounted soldiers On their aetival in
India they were joined by Meotmishh and lus mascer
Quebu'ddin Aibake who liad eained the horses of the royal
army so well that im the ehuck of fight they dashed fearlessly
against the elephants of Prthora’s atmy and dismayed them,
He also organized some mobile columns of watctors on
horseback wha moved speedily on he battlefield from
flank, to flant, of the Ghort army throwing their weight m
the scale, wherever needed. At last, Prithviraja was defeated
and fled, He was caprured near the river Sarsutt and
falled, His brother Govinds Rat who had wounded
Mu rzau'ddin Muhammad Ghoti in the previous battle
was slan,

Thus was a decisive victory of the Ghori atmy and
enabled the victor to clam mastery of Hindustin, ebouglt
Is unmediate territorial acquisitions were Amer, Hinst,
Kolidin and Sarsuet For the time being Aymer was
allowed eo eemain under che rule of Prithvttaje’s son Gola,
and simladly Dehli, when gt was subsequently conquered
by Quybu'ddin Aubak, was left under the cule of Govinda
Rai’s heir, the Hind’ chiefs m both cases acknowledging
the suzerainty of Ghoc. Then leaving garrisons and
armies of oceupation at the places of new conquests and
partenlatly at KubeSm which was a milieary centre and
making Quybu'ddin Arbak tus viceroy in Hundustin,
Mo'tzzu'ddin Muhammad Ghort returned to Ghezm

He came back in 50/1194 to fight a battle with Jat
‘Chand of Kanauy and Banaras who had resolved to recover
the terrors which bad been recently conquered and was
marching ahead with a large atmy 2 A battle was fought

+ HN Tf aa3b


196 TUTOHUSSALATIN

Firozibsd on the Jamuna,
course of fight; and Muvrzzu‘ddin Muhammad Ghori
aelueved s denne victory whch enabled lnm to extend
Indian empire up to the borders of Bilae. The
Monghys, Banaras and Asai ourposts on the western
cexweemuty of che Gangeie Doab were then gartuoned and
placed under cheeliatge of a rangi Husimu'ddin by names
and Kanau) too was oceupred
Aleee an interval ol one year (59¢/t894) which
Muvzzu'ddin Muhammad Ghoii spent at Ghazni and hie
viceroy Quybu'ddin Aibak passed sn subduing revolts at
Koil and Ajmer, war sn Hindustin was resumed. In the
opening months of $92/t395 Muhsinmad Ghoti came
back to fight out the tse with the Bhatti Rajputs and
theie leadet Kumies Pala of Thangic (Btina) who were scll
defanc, From the fortcess of Thangie which wat occupied
without much dificulty he advanced to Gwalior which was
ruled by Sallakshiana Pals of he Pacihae dynatty. The
fatter made peace with Mulammad Glyx? who withdrew,
leaving Gwahor 35 well as Thangte uniler the adminiseative
charge of one Bshiu'ddin Tugh
The episode of Gwilor is depreted by +Iximi colourfully
and in a Morid and musical style, In he crue of
wpsode and epic writer he weaves lus narrative
a duce and without any sequence into a romanee bringing
nto the pieture an army of besuntul gids, leaded by the
saj's daughter at whose request Mu'sezu'ddin Mohammad
Ghost is reported to have agreed co the restoration ol
Gwalior to the raja provided the temples in Gwalior were
Emolished and a mosque erected, This is 2 baseless and


‘SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED () 107

palpably absurd story of sxenilege | ‘Isimn’s mistake leaps
to the eye when sts tecalled that the episode of Guihor 1s
anserced in bis Sbzb Nendb ammedtately after the second
battle of Tardin. A similar mistae 1s notceable an the
episode of Abranwita which [ay on the Inghway of
Motizzu’ddio Muhammad Ghan’s rerun yourney co Ghaznt
though ‘Isami desenbes ae frankly asa clear defest of the
Turks (verses 1606-1601)

Then follow a few verses an the Sbzb Namsh stressing
the unswerning loyalty of Qutbu'ddin Aibak and tis
adoranon of tis royal master Mu'tzzu'ddin Muhammad
Ghoti who called him to Ghizni ostensibly with the object
of resting kum. This took place probably in the course of
4590/1194, 2 litle before Muhammad Ghon's fight with
Ja Chand of Kanauy And, most probably the object of
Quebu'ddin Arbak's vite co Ghazmt was to help his mascee
matute the plans of che impending ight with Jar Chand of
Kanayy

Isama leaves undated lus oattstive of the death of
Gyyigo'ddin bin Sim which he places in the order of
events after the bate of Chandwir and Mutzzu'ddia
Muhammad Ghon's return to Ghazal, And he takes no
notice of Qutbu'ddin Arbah’s conquest of Kalinyar which
ts mentioned by Hasan Nucimi? and 1s confirmed by
Cunningham? who says that Kaliysr was ateacked ewice—
tn 1196/593 and againin 1202/599 It appears that
the Chandellas who held Kalwjar as well as Mahoba
and Khajursho were defeated and the whole region which
1s depicted by ‘Isami as Katehe was occupied.

2 HN Tye 283

2 CR mp 456


1
soda fbg96 ay 5 (om
(e0gg yam seg wt paip9) bes sotsaa f9S265
sisal yeas mesg 30 ESN EYE (8)
dt
i Er
SSuugerteSsesS apes wee (>)

selves yo sane bates

PAW HISEPP.NEIV.) 11 POSEY C=

i
gtorfotb juo syrvou
ous 295 exqna sets Boe JL Pruegnp (4)

6601

7 skep Kx20}
forth px
oSonghe

ar eT
oa ee a

rsp, bq pouonsuoyy spicy aqs ws pur muBizy ung fo worsrang 991 quin paugeyy wens foe

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (I) 199

Lakhmya). Being thoroughly unprepared the raja decided
upon flight. He fled by aback door of hus palace, and
Nadia was immediately occupied by chat strange aggressor
who according to ‘Tsim was disguised asa merchant.
However, he lefe Nadia for certain reasons and came over
tothe region of Sankakot (now in East Bengal) There
he died bue hus successors continued ehere as rulers for about
three generations.

Wkhuydru'ddin bin Mohammad Bakhtyae Khaly's
attempt to conquer Tiber and China 1s considered by
‘Isim as an evidence of his disseminating Islim from
Lakdinauti to China, But he did nothing of the kind, He
failed completely in hus projected campaign which brought
Aestruction upon lus army and made him die an untimely.
death, He was sinking to death afflicted by untold
depression and grief when, sts sad, he was stabbed by
one “Alt Mardin—a soldier of his own escort,?

1 TNBLp 157

1g SUTOHU'SSALATIN

Inceresting and by no means void of hiseoricat value
we ISuxi s story of Mohammad bin Bikhtyst Katy He
introduces lumi as an officer of Muhammad Ghori's army
serving na division under the personal command of
Tiyw'ldin Yalduz, He was dismissed from the atmy
roll for some fault of his, On being relieved of bts
military command he came from Ghszni co India and
wanted to accept service undet Rit Jar Singh of Chuttot.
But Pace directed Int steps un the ditection of Gaur. ‘sini

gives no information about the route of lus journey and
knocks out some innporea
4 synthene study of Minha, Raverry and Cunningham,
Te appeacs thve.Tkityen'ddin Muhammad bin Bakhry3e
Kbslji wene primarily to the Magadh region, cast of the
Karamansa river with a band of tno hundred mounted
soldiers whom he had collected on his own account, With
there help he captured the monastic town of Uddandapur-
esa! (buar gales Diba according to Minhf)® He erected
8 commemoration fort on the site of Uadandapuedesay and,
flushed with success, he advanced to Nalanda which be
captured in 60/1203. Ar ehis stage he 1 satd to have
journeyed to Debit and met Qutbu'ddin Aibak who ebarged
fhum wich che musson of further conquest, Thus armed
with confidence the young conqueror proceeded in 601/
1204 towards Gaur or Lakhnauti. Marching through the
Jharkhand region in south Bihar the dashed weeh a small
med escort of eighteen horsemen into Nadia, royal res
dence of the Pal raja, Lakihmana Sena (!

details which can be had froin

calls him

CR un peas8 and wa, p 75,
2 TNBIp c47

SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (I) 199

Lakhmiya). Being thoroughly unprepared ehe raja decided
upon flight. He fled by a back door of tus palace, and
Nadia was immediately occupted by that strange aggressor
who according to ‘Isimi was disguised asa merchant.
However, he lefe Nadia for certain reasons and came over
to the region of Sankaket (aow m East Bengal) There
he died bue his successors continued there as rulers for about
tree generations.

IkhuyZeu'ddin bin Muhammad Bakhtyée  Khalj’s
attempt to conquer Tibet and China 1s considered by
‘Isimi as an evidence of his disseminating Islim from
Lakhnawt to China, But he did nothing of the kind, He
failed completely in lus projected campaign which brought
destruction upon hus army and made him die an untimely
death, He was sinking co death afflicted by untold
depression and gcief when, sts said, he was stabbed by
‘one ‘Ali Mardin—a soldver of hus own escort,?

1 T.NBLp 157

200

baka aati
Es hag mo (ns)
3pateg ur pai) berteLS 11 J 655-055

‘a ues neaeng 29 nese eye (0)

hos foby Avo squvous
oF Ty Prenweynyy (0)

hash oxox [Ohh ebb hora obtath

wa) Frases (4) Pee) a

foun 20) stains are

1
(ones ut pop) 6for/ofh (G) —_GFor-ofos foth-reb

ofor rh (exppzanseny Urns)
pene Triste) aN
PORE eras

sayy, bg pouonruapy spac, age us pur ruBioy aiagy fo


SHAH NAMAH ELABORATED (1) 20

simi has not mentioned the sons of Mshmid 1
right order (verses 2174-1177) , nor has he mentioned
Shereid whom Finshta’ has noted as a king afte
Masid Ul, Firshea says thar he borrowed this piece
of information from the Tanths Gazideh, But other
lustones make no mencion of Shereid who was murdered
after a year of kis accession by fs brother Arsalin,

‘simi seems co have borrowed lus information about
the suecessors of Sulsin Mahmid and their order of succes-
sion from che Tabagits Nann.t Similar information
1s also given by Nigimu'ddin Abmad Bakshi?

Firishea mentions chat Mastid Ila four-yeatold son
‘of Maudid—was installed on the throne after the death of
Maudid but was deposed in the course of a week 4
stot cakes no notice of this Mas‘ld. So, according to
hum, thete was no Mas'id 111, he has omicted Mas'ad Ii,
shown above within brackets. He has again drawn ‘upon
the Tabigat s Nanri wtuch cells a similar rale®

APPENDIX A

POWER OF GOD (VERSES 1-9)

The spicit behind these couplets'(2-9) illustrating the
power of God is that of the following Quranic verses—

8;

vie 1643 ji, 2x-ans fs 2575 ii, 1505 xxi
6x5 iv, 453 th 51s ti $43 iy 1794 % 1095 C;
vis 95-993 ¥i, 122% xvii, 60s
145 aly 14.

38
86; 1, 16; xxxix, 3.

These verses reveal God as cherisher, protector, helper,
sustainer and the best of planners and dispensers of justice.
‘Agim stresses the importance of Bismillab—a well-known
headline of every surab in che Quran, Bismillah which
Jiterally means ‘by the name of God" is used ceremonially
by every Muslim on undercaking and beginning to do any
and every kind of serious work. See the Reble of Ibn
Battuts, G.O.S. pp. 59, 65, 66, 125,

(Verses 12-15)

According to a saying of the Prophet, God has created
18,000 worlds. ‘Isami means to say that besides this world
and the next there ate many more worlds, for instance
astronomical and physical worlds, worlds of sbought and
spitiwal worlds including the Nasit world ie. the
buman world, knowable by the senses; the Melakit world
1 invisible world of angels and the Labit world, i.e.
the divine world of Reality. Cf. A. Yusuf Ali—The Holy
Quran p. 14


( 204)

(Verses 19-24)
Thus 1s a reference to the Queamic verse.

‘And WE have made above you seven tracts, fe."
orbits in the vinble heavens.’ Sura xxin, v. 17+ Che
A. Yusuf Al—The Holy Quran, p. 876

(Verses. 73.77)
Taubid sigorGes the Istamte ered of the unity of God
as expressed by the pliase Ui slab sll-al lah (there 1s no God
bur God).

APPENDIX B
Mubammad the Prophet (Verses 83-84)

‘simnt's enbure co Prophet Muhammad 1s no efferves-
cence of a poet's mind, The wdea behind wt 15 borne out
by modern cesewch. Says Me. Holms, 2 Roman Catholic
digoneaty of Funland,

‘ln these later times while some sclilats have endeavout=
cd to show chat the Prophet borrowed for the mast part the
doctrines and sdeas of Islam from Chrisuamty or from
Judatsm, others on the contrary have emphatically dented
all JudoChristan snfluenee on him. Whar to say of
reat seicanst who sees only 2 mirage in the so-called appar
tion of Muhammad on the Mount Fira, and whar to say
of another scientist who recently attributed the visions of
Muhammad to his taking exbilerating herbs. In our
‘opinion these scholars ygnore the requisites of tesearch and
fail to bring into limelight the personaliy of Muhammad.


( 05 )

And the sineetity of his prophetic mission has also been
tested by reason and research, The strong conviction of
Mohammad that he was really the messenger of God on
earth is confirmed by the faet that he clearly prohibited
being compared with the ordinary Aibin of Arabia, namely
a priesteonjurer who predicted the future with the help of
arrows, the dice and the like,,,He didnot even claim to be
a worker of miracles. On the eonteary he set hivnself from
the beginning in line with the great prophets of Asia Minor
Abraham, Moses, Jesus. He said thar all hese prophets
had preached to their countrymen the unmixed word of God
‘but those who had received it had disfigured and eorrupted
i, Muljammad was the last of the series of prophets, This
thought which was his own and whieh he had not boreowed
from anyone else proves his politieal and_histotieal instin
this instinee he possessed undeniably. God's word
he preached was the putest and most perfeet interpretat
of the heavenly books. From the beginning’ the second
essential PART of the doctrine of Muhammad was-that he
was the Prophet of God,.,.ui"®

1 Holms, H. Z—Mehomet, Propbete de 1 ‘slam, Patis,
pp. 49-162,

APPENDIX C

KHWAJA NIZAMI OF GANJA (Verses 321)

Suinkh Nigamu'ddin Ilyas bin Yusuf—commonly
known as Nigimi of Ganja, a town in Caucasus—was a
fainous poet of Iran, He ts known as Nizimi Ganjavi
tn the East and as Elzsbatpo! in the west, He was boro
at Qum in Iran in the year 535/110 and died there at the
age of sixty-four in the 600 Hyra/A.D. 1203. A great
mystic and epte poet, he has been called ‘second great
clasucal poet of Persia’, He left belund many works, the
‘most important being the Bbemss (quintet), also called
Pany Gany (five treasures), namely (1) Makbzanss Asrir
complered 1m 571/1176 (u) Kbusten wa Shirin completed
in 575/1180 (1) Lala wa Maynin completed an
5384/1188 (1v) Sikander Namah compleced in 507/119!
(W) Haft Parker completed in 94/1198.

‘The Mekbxens Asrir (lerally wessurehouse of
secrets) 1s a collection of ethical and religious
maxims in about eight thousand vetses. The Kbusrau we
Sbivin verses the love-story of Khusrau Parvez, the
Sissaman emperor and the Armenian princess Sitio with
Farhad as the undestrable paramour who meets with 2
tragic fate, The Lele wa Meyniin reproduces the tragie
story of the infaruation of Quis, the Arab poet, for his
beloved Laila, cach belonging to a tribe bieerly hostile to
the other. Both the lovets eventually find relief in death.
The Heft Paster (Inerally seven effigies) recounts the
explons of Bahram Gor, a king of ancient Iran, who fell


(207)

Iove with the seven princesses of seven counteies—India,
nna, Khwirizma, Russia, Persia, Byzantium, and Morocco
fand marred them all in succession, building for each
spectal palace adaptable ro her tasre. The story of each
ancess 14 given in a separate parker or chapter, Unlike
he other four the Sikandar Namab (iterally the book of
exandet) 18 an epie™ wick a mystic couch which makes
sexaner a propber as well as 2 conqueror and relates the
try of bis search for the fountain of fe It dvells on rhe
ed and role of waztts who must be plulosophers Tike the
great Aritorle,

Nusimai Ganjavt specialized in the domain of megnevs
and epie poetry wherein he stands uncvalleds He has
exercued profouud influence on the succeeding generation?
of sufi poets, notably on Amir Khusrau Dehlawi, Khwaja
rm Kaul, Fardu'ddin ‘Amie and Amir ‘Alt Sher

lawl

ADDENDUM

Here 1s che eeanslatron of those verses and hemisuches
tn che text which ehe printers dropped,

Verses Nos,
575
578

59°

59

Verses Nos.

575
578

590597

Who uprooted the sdol-house of Somnath?
Who wielded che sword in the region of
Goji?

Who sold Jaspal in Khucasin?

Who buent Gobind in Tatain?

Who conqueted Teling by force of his
am?

Who captured Jajnagar up to Bengal?
Who was the frst to conquer Gutts (Gi)
aed Kuni?

Who washed tus swoed in che waters of
the sea?

COMMENTARY

That is, Mahmid of Ghszni

See p82, fom. 2 and p. gn, verses
1326-1330 supr
‘simi means to say that Sulsin Mubam-
mad who was known as Ulugh Khin
during the reign of his father became
famous for these conquests and exploits
of his in the Deccan,


