


Dr. B. R. AMBEDKAR
OPEN UNIVERSITY
LIBRARY
HYDERABAD-500 033

DR. B.R AMBEDKAR OPEN UNIVERSITY
UNIVERSITY - LIBRARY

0

JAHANGIR


THE

HISTORY OF JAHANGIR
By FRANCIS GLADWIN

EDITED WITH NOTES BY
Rao Bahadur
K. V. RANGASWAMI AIYANGAR,™. A.

PrincipaL, H, H, THE MAwaraja's COLLEGE OF ARTS, TRIVANDRUM

PUBLISHERS;
B. G. PAUL & CO. MADRAS

Copyright
1930

INTRODUCTION

THE history of the reign of Jahangir now
reprinted was published in 1788. Its author
Francis Gladwin had a considerable reputation
in his day as an accomplished Persian scholar and
translator. Between 1783 and 1786 he publish-
ed a valuable translation of Abul Fazl’s famous
Ain-i-Akbari. The success of the translation
encouraged him to persevere in his researches in
the history of the successors of Akbar. He
planned a large work which was “to attempt a
delineation of the most material changes that
happened in the constitution of Hindostan during
the reign of Jehangir, Shahjehan and Aurunga-
zebe”. He apparently wrote out the bulk, if not
the whole, of this work, to judge from the reference
to the later parts of it in the perface to the first
volume of the large history, which alone was
published.

Gladwin’s History is thus a fragment, but it
is complete as far as the reign of Jahangir is
concerned. His translation of the Ain-i-Akbari
was brought out under the patronage of Warren
Hastings who warmly commended it to the Board
of Directors. This famous translation is still
useful, and is, in fact, owing to the availability of
a cheap reprint published some years ago in
Calcutta, now the only easily accessible English
translation, the magistral annotated translation

vi INTRODUCTION

begun by H. Blochmann and completed by Colonel

H.S. Jarrett, which superseded Gladwin’s trans-
lation, having long been out of print. That
Gladwin’s translation of the Ain-i-Akbari is still
of value is evidenced by the publication a few
years ago of a supplement to it prepared by
Dr. Rushbrook Williams for the use of students
studying the political and economic organization of
the Mughal Empire.

Like Anderson, Halhed and Hamilton, Gladwin
benefited largely from the discerning patronage of
Warren Hastings. It is probable that the depar-
ture of Warren Hastings from India is the main
cause of the failure of Gladwin to complete the
projected History of Akbar’s successors. The
‘History of Jehangir ’ is dedicated to Lord Corn-
wallis. Its success in a commercial sense does not
appear to have been great. Theslim quarto volume
passed out of print very soon, and it has since
remained one of the scarcer 18th century contribu-
tions to Indian History in the oriental book-market
of to-day. Its title seldom appears in the price-lists
issued by the leading second-hand booksellers.
Its value as a sober and accurate account of the
reign of Jahangir was recognised by the late
Dr. Vincent Smith, but hitherto students of Indian
history have been unable to obtain it owing to the
prohibitive prices commanded by copies occasion-
ally offered for sale. It is with a view to make this
rare and useful work accessible to students of
Indian history that the publishers have now

-~—nuemmaed tn seesia thie ranrint.

INTRODUCTION vii

Very little is known of the personal history of
Gladwin. In the preface to the work now reprint-
ed he refers to his 23 years’ residencein India. As
the preface is dated August 1788, Gladwin would
appear to have come out to India about 1765. It
is known that he began his career in the service
of the East India Company as an officer of the
Bengal Army. He showed from the commence-
ment of his service a passion for oriental studies
and a remarkable aptitude for the mastery of
languages. He pursued the study of oriental
literatures with steadfastness and zeal. His re-
putation as an orientalist, and particularly as a
Persian scholar was soon well established. Under
the inspiration of Warren Hastings, whose newly-
founded Asiatic Society, Gladwin joined on its
foundation in 1783, the famous translation of the
Ain-i-Akbari was prepared and published in three
substantial volumes between 1783 and 1786. Sub-
sequent to the publication of his fragmentary
history of Akbar’s successors in 1788, Gladwin
published “ An Account of the transactions in
Bengal during the Viceroyships of Assim-Us-Shan
and Alavardikhan,” some translations of the major
Persian Classics like the Gulistan, a Persian
Hindusthani Dictionary and a number of vocabu-
laries and works on grammar dealing with Indian
languages.

In 1801 the Marquis of Wellesly appointed
Gladwin as the first Professor of Persian in the
famous College of Fort William which was founded
for the purpose of enabling the members of the

viii INTRODUCTION

East India Company’s Civil Service to obtain
suitable instruction in the languages, literatures
and the history of India. Gladwin took his
duties as a professor very seriously, and made a
great and well merited reputation as an instructor
of infective enthusiasm. He also made many plans
for further literary work. Among these was one
for the publication of carefully edited and
annotated Persian Classics. For this purpose
he even prepared new founts of oriental types
which he presented to the College. After 1802
Gladwin appears to have obtained a more lucra-
tive place in the Company’s Service as Collector
of Customs and subsequently Commissary Resi-
dent at Patna. No publication of his can be
traced after 1809. Very little is known of his
declining years. He is presumed to have died on
or about the year 1813 when a probate of his will
was issued.

Gladwin’s History merits republication not
only on account of its scarcity but also on account
of its excellence as a sober, scholarly work based
on a careful study of the original sources in
Persian. Gladwin refers in the Preface to his
History, with pardonable pride, to the value of his
collections of Persian historical manuscripts
‘purchased at great expense” during a period of
nearly quarter of a century. Gladwin’s acuteness is
shown by the excellent use which he has made of
the manuscripts of the authentic biography of
Jahangir, at a time when the spurious version of
it waa acclaimed to be the original of the famous

INTRODUCTION ix

autobiography. James Anderson had indeed
brought the authentic version to the notice of
scholars by publishing translations of some extracts
from it in 1786. But, till the publication of the
monumental ‘History of India as told by its
historians ’, by Sir Henry Elliot and Professor John
Dowson, the value of the authentic Memoirs was
not properly appreciated. In 1864 an edition of
the Memoirs was published by Syed Ahmed Khan
under the title of ‘ Tuzuk-i-Jahangir’. The first
volume of a scholarly English translation of the
Memoirs was published by Mr. H. Beveridge in
1909. The translation was completed in 1914 by
the publication of the second volume by Colonel
Rogers.

The spurious Memoirs appeared about three
years after Jahangir’s death. It was this work
which was translated by Major David Price of the
Bombay Army. Price’s translation appeared in
1829 as a volume published under the Oriental
Translation Fund. For many years an animated
controversy raged over the question of the authenti-
city of the rival versions of the Memoirs, and leading
Persian scholars like De Sacy, Rieu, Morley, Elliot
and Dowson took part in the discussion. The con-
troversy is now at an end. Scholars are agreed now
that the version which Price translated does not
represent the authentic autobiography. Its confus-
ed arrangement, errors of statement, extravagant
language, digressions, and paucity of dates show

that as a literary and historical work it is deci-
B

x INTRODUCTION

dedly inferior to the authentic version. The
uncomplimentary references to Shahjahan found
in the authentic version are absent in the
spurious. This is obviously due to the circumstance
that the mangled version appeared during the reign
of Shahjahan. The genuine Memoirs were pub-
lished in his lifetime, with the approval of Jahangir.
They are now known to exist in two issues. The
first of these, as recorded in the work itself, carries
the narrative only to the end of the 12th year
of the reign. It is to these Memoirs that Gladwin
refers in the following passage:

“They contain a minute account of the political and private
conduct of his (Jehangir’s) life from the commencement of his
reign to the end of thetwelfth year. They are universally admired
for the purity, elegance and simplicity of the style and he appears
in general to have exposed his own follies and weaknesses with
great candour and fidelity. When he had completed the Memoirs
of twelve years, he distributed several copies of them amongst
his children and the principal officers of his Court. He continued
these Memoirs with his own hand till the commencement of the
seventeenth year of his reign, when finding himself, from ill-health,
unable to proceed, he from that period to the time of his death,
employed Mutamed Khan as his amanuensis. The whole of the
continuation is exceedingly scarce ; the compiler of this history
not having been able to procure the sight of any other copy than
the one which was lent to him by his friend Colonel Polier.”

With reference to the above passage, it may
be noted that Mutamad Khan was commissioned
by the Emperor, whose health was then breaking
down, to prepare the Memoirs only from the
seventeenth tothe nineteenth year. This is the
second issue of the genuine Memoirs. It brings

INTRODUCTION xi

the narrative from the accession to the nineteenth
year of the reign.

The merit of Gladwin’s History consists in
his careful study of virtually all the sources avail-
able to the student of the history of the reign of
Jahangir. Though annalistic in form and written
in an unornate and pedestrian style, the History is
redeemed from dulness by the good sense and
critical acumen of the author. Gladwin claimed
that the reader might rely on the fidelity of the
compilation. The close examination of the History
and a comparison of it with the extant sources will
show that this claimis justified. A perusal of
the footnotes added to the present reprint will
show how in very few instances alone Gladwin’s
statements require modification in the light of
later research. Gladwin’s style does not lack
clearness or force. His narrative runs on
without effort and maintains the equable
dignity and brevity of the originals which
it follows. The limitations imposed on himself in
regard to the treatment of the subject have un-
fortunately stoodin the way of Gladwin’s attempt-
ing a critical discussion of some of the more
intriguing problems of Jahangir’s reign, such as
the treatment of Khusru, the murder of Sher
Afghan, the character of Nur Jahan, etc. The
discussions of these topics would have enhanced
the value of the History. But Gladwin has tried
to make up for such omissions by giving a short
but essentially just estimate of Jahangir’s charac-
ter and attainments. On several questions he

xii INTRODUCTION

has provided us only with his verdicts without
revealing the grounds on which they were based.
Judged in the light of recent research Gladwin’s
conclusions will be foundto be singularly valid
and to vindicate the quality of his critical power.
Probably the only point on which a modern student
would quarrel with Gladwin is his unfavourable
characterisation of Nur Jahan and his readiness
to attribute her public acts to ignoble motives.

Ata time when interest in the critical study
of Indian History has become general, it is un-
necessary to justify the publication of the reprint
of a work of this character. In order that this
reprint might be more useful to students, notes
have been added giving references to original and
secondary sources of information. A _ list of the
principal authorities has also been given. The
original punctuation and spelling of proper names
and Persian words have naturally been retained.
In the preparation of the edition and particularly
of the notes, which have entailed considerably
more trouble and more labour than their number
and length would indicate, I have been greatly
assisted by Mr. T.M. Krishnamachari, M.A., B.L.,
Professor of History, H. H. The Maharajha’s
College of Arts, Trivandrum, and by my son and
pupil Mr. K. R. Padmanabha Aiyangar, M.A., B.L.,
of the Indian Audit and Accounts Service.

TRIVANDRUM,
K. V. RANGASWAMI
12th Sevtember 1930.

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE
FOOTNOTES TO THE TEXT

Maasir

M. J.

Firish

R. B.

Price

Takmil

ooo

Akbarnama by Abul Fazl translated by H.
Beveridge.

Sir Henry Elliot and Professor John Dowson's
History of Indsa as told by its own Htstorsans
1867-77.

Iqbalnama.i-Jahangirt by Motamad Khan (Biblio-
theca Indica) 1865.

Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal.
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society.

Khafikhan’s Muntakhab-ul-lubab (Bibliotheca
Indica), 1869,

Maasiy-ul-Umarva by Shab Nawaz Khan publish-
ed by the Bengal Asiatic Society in three
parts and being translated into English,

Maasirt Jahangivs by Khwaja Kamgar Husain.

Tarskhi-Hind by Muhammad Qasim Hindu Shah
translated by Briggs in 4 vols. in 1829.

Tuzuk-t-Jahangivs translated into English in two
volumes by Rogers and revised and edited by
Beveridge, 1909-1914.

Memoirs of Jahangir (spurious memoirs) trans-
lated by Major D. Price.

Takmil.s-Akbarnama by Inayat-ullah.

CHIEF AUTHORITIES CITED IN THE NOTES

Akbaynama—by Abul Faz) published since 1897 and translated by
Henry Beveridge.

Asn-s-Akbari—by Abul Fazl translated by H. Blochmanand Col.
Jarraett in 3 vols. Calcutta 1878, 1891, 1894,

Takmil.t-A kbavnama—by Inayat Ullah continuing Abul Fazl’s work
from 1602 to 1605.

Muntakhab-ut-Tawartkk—by Abdul Qadir Badauni translated into
English in three parts by Col. Ranking; W. H. Lowo
(revised by E. B. Cowell); and Col. Haig respectively
(Bibliotheca Indica) the last being yet incomplete.

The Wigaya—by Asad Beg, servant of Abul Fazl.
Arfaul Akhbay—by Muhammad Amin.

Tavtkhs Févishta—by Muhammad Qasim Hindu Shah (Firisbta)
translated by Briggs in 4 vols. in 1829.

Tuzuk-s-Jahangivi— Memoirs of Jahangir (genuine) published by
Sayyid Ahmad Khan, 1864 translated by A Rogers and
revised and edited by Henry Beveridge in 2 vols. London
19091914.

Tarikh.i-Salim Shahti—Memoirs of Jahangir translated by Major
David Price (1829) [reprinted by the Bangabasi Press
Calcutta, 1906,)—This is a famous translation of the
spurious version.

Iqbalnama Jahangivi—by Motamad Khan, Text (Bibliotheca
Indica), 1865,

Maasiv-i-Jakangivi—by Khwaja Kamgar Husain (Kbuda Baksh
M. S.).

CHIEF AUTHORITIES CITED IN THE NOTES xv

Khulasai-ut-Tawartkk—by Sujan Rai.

Muntakhab-ul-lubab—by Mubammad Hashim Khafi. Khan (Biblio-
theca Indica), 1869.

Tatimma Wagtat Jahangivi—by Muhammad Hadi in Elliot and
Dowson, Vol. VI.

Maastv-ul-umava—by Shah Nawaz Khan published by the Bengal
Asiatic Society.

History of Indta as told by sts own Historians—by Sir H. M. Elliot
and J. Dowson, in 8 vols,, London, 1867—77.

Mongolscae legation is commentavius—-of Father Anthony Monserrate,
edited by Father Hosten and translated into English by
J. S. Hoyland, Oxford University Press, 1922.

Akbar and the Jesusts—Part of his larger work ‘ Thesaurus etc.’ by
Father Pierre Du Jarrie, translated with notes by
C. H. Payney, Routledge, 1926,

Jesuit Missions to Emperoy Akbay—by E.D. Maclagan, in J. A. S. B.
Part I, Vol. LXV, 1896, pp. 38-113.

Jahangiv’s India—by Francisco Pelsart, traaslated by W.H.
Moreland and Dr. Geyl-Heffer, 1925.

Embassy of Siv Thomas Roe to Indsa—Edited by William Foster,
new edition, revised and illustrated, Oxford University
Press, 1926.

Voyage to East Indta—by the Rev. Edward Terry, London, 1777.
Travels of Pietvo Della Valle—translated and edited by Edward
Grey, 2 Vols. Hakluyt Society, 1891.

‘De Imperto Magnt Mogali’s....—by John De Laet. First part
translated by Lethbridge in the Calcutta Review, 1870 and

1871.

Letteys veceived by the East India Company from sts servants in the
East—6 vols. 1602—1617. Edited by Danvers and Foster,
London, 1896—1902.

xvi CHIEF AUTHORITIES CITED IN THE NOTES

* Observations of William Finch, merchant, taken out of his large
journal’ in Purchas IV, pp 1-77.

The English Factories tn Indta—1618—1629. Edited by William
Foster. London, 1906—09.

Travels of Peter Mundy Vol. I[—Edited by R. C. Temple. Hakluyt
Society 1907—1914.

Travels in Indta—by Jean Baptiste Tavernier edited by V. Ball in
2 volumes 1889.

Travels in the Mughal Emptve, 1656—58—by M. Francois Bernier
translated by A. Constable, London, 1914,

Stovio do Mogor, 1653—1708, by Niccolo Manucci translated by
Irvine in 4 Vols.

‘The Amnals and Antiquities of Rajasthan’'—by James Todd 2 Vols,
Routiedge.

Moghul Architectuve of Fathpury Sikyvi—described and illustrated by
E. W. Smith, Government Press, Allahabad, 1894—1898,

Old Tstie

THE

HISTORY OF HINDOSTAN

DURING THE REIGNS OF
JEHANGIR, SHAHJEHAN,
AND

AURUNGZEBE

BY

FRANCIS GLADWIN, Esq.

VOLUME THE FIRST


TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
CHARLES EARL CORNWALLIS,

KNIGHT OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER,
GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF INDIA,
&c. &c. &C.

THIS WORK

IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED,
BY HIS LORDSHIP’S

MOST OBEDIENT,
AND
MOST HUMBLE SERVANT,

THE AUTHOR
CALCUTTA,
15th of Aug. 1788.

ERRATA

Page 38, foot-note 2, 1. 1. for ‘‘ Khurm’s” read “‘ Khurram’s ”

9

”

9

99

Ed

9

”

44, foot-note 4, 1. 1. after Khusru insert a comma

45, line 25. for ‘‘ shwon” read “ shown”

47, 4, 27. for “ perhunnah” read “ pergunnah ”

61, foot-note 2, 1. 1. for *‘ brough ” read “‘ brought ”

70, line 14. for “‘ enraged ” read ‘‘ engaged "’
75, 5, 12. for “ been” read “seen”

87, ,, 28. before ‘‘ along ” add “ stopped ”

90, 1. 8.

102, 1. 25.

138, 1. 7.

142, 1, 18.
148, 1. 12.
152, 1. 12.
158, 1, 25.

for ** Elemaded dowlah ” read ‘‘ Etemaded-
dowlah ”

Jor “ began ” read “* begun ”’
Jor ‘‘ be at” read “‘ bear”
for ‘‘ Meet” read ‘* Meer”
for ‘‘ Mafir ” read “ Masir ”
for “ sirmaun ” read “‘ firmaun ”
Sor ‘‘ days” read ‘“‘ years”

for “* Khelaffut ” read ‘* Khelassut ”

PREFACE

THE Moghul Empire, in Hindostan, did not obtain any
regular form till the reign of Akber. Timour was only an
invader. Baber possessed little more than Lahoor and Cabul.
Hemayun was expelled by Shere Khan; and lived but a few
months after having recovered his kingdom, by the defeat of
Secunder Sour, the son and successor of that usurper. Akber,
at the age of thirteen, succeeded to the peaceful inheritance of
his father’s dominions ; and, during his minority, the Govern-
ment acquired vigour, new provinces were conquered,
commerce flourished, the finances were improved and disburse-
ments regulated, through the activity and valour, the wisdom,
integrity and economy of Byram Khan, the Ameer ul Omrah.
When the Emperor assumed the management of affairs, he
pursued the wise plans of Byram Khan; and after the ex-
perience of thirty-seven years, with the assistance of an upright
and most able minister, reduced his observations to a regular
system. His Institutes, drawn up by the great Abulfazel, are
a lasting monument of their united fame. The skill and
sagacity displayed in these arrangements, for every department,
with the regard shewn throughout for the security of the life
and property of the meanest peasant, give us an high idea of
the Government ; and it astonishes us to hear the minister of
an absolute prince, bred up in a faith notorious for its intolerant
spirit, discussing with freedom the rights of humanity; boldly
reprobating persecution, and maintaining that the Almighty is
the common parent of all mankind. But we contemplate with
still higher admiration and reverence, the monarch, who in
opposition to the prevailing maxims of despotism, could not
only adopt such enlarged sentiments himself, but have the
generosity to authorise their promulgation, in order to diffuse
general happiness by establishing peace and unanimity amongst

xxii PREFACE

his subjects of such opposite persuasions, as the followers of the
Bedes, and those of the Mohammedan faith. The one, mild
and forgiving, refusing proselytes, but professing an universal
philanthropy ; the other fierce and vindictive, making converts
with the sword; despising and persecuting all those who
embrace not their particular creed ; pursuing with unrelenting
fury, even those amongst themselves, who differ but in the
most immaterial point, regarding them as absolute infidels, the
objects of their scorn and utter detestation.

The candour and indulgence which I have experienced,
in the publication of my translation of the Ayeen Akbery, both
here and in Europe, embolden me to attempt a delineation of
the most material changes that happened in the constitution
of Hindostan, during the succeeding reigns of Jehangir,
Shahjehan and Aurungzebe.

The materials for this work are taken from authentic
Persian manuscripts, of which I have anample collection,
purchased at a very great expense, during twenty-three years
residence in India. The English reader may rely upon the
fidelity of this compilation; and for the satisfaction of the
Orientalist, whenever I have met with any edict, law or regu-
lation, particularly important, curious and interesting, I have
given the original along with the translation, in an appendix,
at the end of each reign. Those of Jehangir and Shahjehan
afford only few instances of innovation or reform ; but the reign
of Aurungzebe furnishes many important documents ; as, under
the Government of that monarch, the constitution of Hindos-
tan was publicly declared (what was before only implied) to
be founded on the strictest principles of Mohammedanism ;
and in these edicts the larided property and other rights of the
subject are clearly stated ; many points relative to the preroga-
tive of the crown are accurately defined ; and the officers of
Government fully instructed in the nature and extent of their

respective duties.

PREFACE XXili

From the consideration that under Aurungzebe the
empire attained to its fullest vigour, I have deferred, till the
conclusion of his reign, my remarks on the progressive state of
Hindostan, and particularly of the revenues, from the acces-
Sion of Jehangir ; and by observing this method, I am enabled
to place the whole in a clear and comprehensive point of view.

Impressed with the warmest sense of gratitude to my
honourable employers, to my particular friends,and to the
public in general, for their liberal encouragement of my
former labours, I pursue my present task with ardour, alacrity
and satisfaction; and shall be happy if my endeavours herein
may entitle me to the continuance of their favour, approbation
and support.

FRANCIS GLADWIN


PARTICULAR EVENTS.

DURING THE REIGN OF AKBER
RELATING TO

SULTAN SILEEM.

When the Emperor Akber entered the twenty-
ninth year of his age, being very unhappy at not
having a son, he went to the village of Sikry,
about ten cose distance from Agra, to pay a visit
to Sheikh Sileem, a celebrated derveish, and in his
presence made a vow, that if Heaven granted him
that blessing, he would perform a pilgrimage, on
foot, from Agra to the shrine of Khojeh Moyened-
deen Cheisty in the city of Ajmeer. The derveish
assured him, that Heaven had listened to his
prayers, and would bestow upon him three sons.
Akber rejoiced exceedingly at these tidings, and
promised that his first-born should be committed
to the care of Sheikh Sileem and, accordingly,
when one of his Begums' was far advanced in her
pregnancy, he sent her to the house of the Sheikh,
at Sikry, where on Wednesday the 17th of Reby ul
Awwel, A. H. 977, or 29th of August 1569, she was
delivered of a prince, whom Akber named Sultan
Sileem, and who was afterwards the Emperor
Jehangir.? On this happy occasion, public rejoi-
cings were made throughout the Empire; Akber

bestowed magnificent presents upon his courtiers;

1 For her name see Sujan Rai (1918), p. 374; Beveridge (J.A.S.B. 1887
I 164-7).

2 Price (Bangabasi edition 1904) adopts A.H. 978; Abul Faz! (Beveridge II
503) gives 30th August and the Tuzuk (R.B.12) 31st August. See Badauni
(Lowe) IJ, 124; Nizamuddin Ahmad (E.D.V., 334).

2 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

distributed considerable sums in charity, and
ordered all prisoners to be set at liberty.'*

About five months after the birth of the prince,
Akber prepared for fulfilling his vow, by making a
pilgrimage on foot, from Agra to the shrine of
Moyeneddeen Cheisty, one hundred and forty cose,
which he divided into twelve stages.2 He set out
on the 12th of Shaban, or 19th of January 1570,
and at the end of seventeen days arrived at the
shrine, where he offered up his prayer and thanks-
giving with fervent devotion. This renowned
Mohammedan saint * was born in Seistan, from
whence he is sometimes styled Sanjary. His
father, Khojeh Hassan, dying at the time he was
only fifteen years old, he sought the protection of
Sheikh Ibrahim Kundoozy. When he arrived at
manhood, he travelled to Samarcand and Bokhara,
and from thence to Khorasan, where, in the town
of Haroon dependant upon Nishapoor, he became a
pupil of Sheikh Osman Haroony, with whom he
lived, under a very austere discipline, for twenty
years; and then, by the advice of his teacher, he
travelled into far countries, and visited the most
famous doctors and holy men of that age. Sheikh
Moyeneddeen was the grandson of Sheikh Mowdood
Cheisty and in him that family became extinct.

From Ajmeer the Emperor went to Delhi,
where he arrived in the month of Ramzan, and

paid his devotions at the tomb of Hemayun and

1 Akbarnama (Beveridge) II, 504-5.

* Masir Jehangiry

3 Akbarnama (Beveridge) II, 502-3 ; 510-11; R.B,

m1, 127; Firishtah (Briggs) H, 33; Nizamuddin {E.D.
3 Badauni (Haig) III, 87.

I. Badauni (Lowe)
Vv 334.

SULTAN SILEEM 3

other holy shrines in that neighbourhood. From
thence he proceeded 'to Agra, and got back to
that city on the 6th of Zilkadeh, or the 11th ot
April, 1570.

Two years afterwards, upon the conquest of
Gujerat, the Emperor in commemoration of that
event, as well as for the good fortune which had
befallen him at Sikry, founded there a city, to
which he gave the name of Futtehabad;! and many
of the nobility erecting magnificent houses on that
spot, in the course of fourteen or fifteen years, it
became very populous.*

As soon as the prince was four years, four
months and four days old,? Mollana Meerkillan
Heravee was appointed his tutor, and Katib
Mohammed his etaleek, or governor; and when
the latter was sent upon a military expedition,
that office was conferred upon Mirza Khan-
khanan.* Four years after this, the Emperor
appointed the prince a munsebdar of ten thousand
effective cavalry.* When he arrived at his
fifteenth year,‘ he was married to the daughter®
of Bhogwandoss, one of the most powerful

Rajahs of Hindustan. The next year he married

1 On the architecture of Fathpur Sikri E. W. Smith has produced five
profusely illustrated volumes in the Archaeological Survey of India. See also
R. B. I, 2; Monserrate, pp. 30-2; A. N. II, 503; Badauni III (Haig),
18-27.

* Toozek Jehangiry, or Jehangir’s Commentaries, written by himself.

2 A.N. III, 105-6; Badauni (Lowe) II, 173; Nizamuddin (E.D.V. 370.)

3 Abdur Rahim Khan, son of Bairam Khan.

“ For a particular account of munsebs, or military dignities, vide Ayeen
Akbery, Vol. I, page 142.

* More exactly when he was 15 years, 5 months and 13 days old.

5 Man Bai. Raja Mansingh was the adopted son of Bhagwandoss, and the
uncle of Man Bai’s son Prince Khusru.

& HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

the daughter of Rajah Oudy Singh,' son of the
great’ Row Maldeo, whose army consisted of
eighty thousand men, and who gained several
victories over the Ranna of Chittore. Within a year
after his marriage with the daughter of Bhogwan-
doss, she was delivered of a princess, who was
called Sultana ul Nissa Begum ; ? and the following
year she was brought to bed of a son to whom
Akber gave the name of Sultan Khusru.2 About
this time Sultan Sileem took for his third wife, the
daughter of Khojeh Hassan, who brought him
Sultan Purveiz.“. He now married a fourth wife,
the daughter of Keysoodoss by whom he had a
princess named Bahar Bana Begum. Two months
subsequent Sultan Khorum,’ afterwards Shahjehan,
was born at Lahoor, of the daughter of Rajah Oudy
Singh.*

When Akber marched to the Dekhan, he sent
Sultan Sileem into Ajmeer with a powerful army,
to make war upon the Ranna of Chittore. Raja
Mansingh, Shah Kuly Khan, and others of the
principal nobility were left with the prince. Rajah
Mansingh, although at this time Soobahdar of
Bengal, was prevailed upon to go against the
Ranna; and appointed his brother, Juggetsingh, for
the management of his government; but he dying
shortly after, his son, Mahasingh, succeeded him

in that trust. The prince sent forward Rajah
A. N. II, 677-8 ; Badauni (Lowe) If, 352.
. B. I, 15; Price 35; Khaf, I, 245.

I, 18-9; Price 33,

.B.
RB I, 18-9, Two years and two months after Khusru,

1
a
E3
4
& I, 18-9
dd

SULTAN SILEEM 5

Mansingh with the army, and followed himself by
slow marches, hunting all the way, till he arrived
at Oudypoor. The Ranna after some skirmishes
with the imperial troops, fled to the mountains, and
no advantage was gained over him, but taking
some prisoners.'

At this juncture Mansingh received such
intelligence from Bengal as made him desirous to
return thither, in order to quell the disturbances
occasioned by his absence; and thinking the present
state of affairs favourable for his brother-in-law,
Sileem, he advised him to take advantage of the
Emperor’s being engaged inforeign conquests, which
might detain him a long time, and possess himself of
allthe provinces on the east of the river, Ganges.’
Sileem, seduced by the evil counsel of Mansingh,
and supported by the advice of some other cour-
tiers, gave up the pursuit of the Ranna, and
marched back to Agra.2 Kheleej Khan, the killadar
of Agra, unsuspecting of danger, came out to pay
his respects to the prince, whose partisans advised
him to detain that officer, till he consented to
deliver up the fort, which contained all the imperial
treasure ;‘ an acquisition that could not fail of
raising the possessor tothethrone. But he reject-
ed this advice, and after receiving the compliments
of Kheleej Khan, gave him leave to return to Agra ;
and then proceeded with his army to Allahabad.

Miriam Mekany, the Emperor’s mother, being
1 A.N. III, 831; Khaf. 1, 216.
2 ALN. Text III, 831; E.D. VI, 98-9 ; Maasiri Jahangiri, p. 13.
3M. J. p., 13.
4 which amounted to 20 million at Akbar's death according to the Jesuits.

6 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

informed of Sileem’s intentions, went out to meet
him to endeavour to dissuade him from so rash an
enterprise. But Sileem, in order to avoid her, set
off for Allahabad in a light boat; and the Begum,
disappointed in her purpose, returned to Agra
greatly mortified.'

A. H. 1009—A. D. 1600.

When Sultan Sileem returned to Allahabad, he
lavishly bestowed upon his adherents, the provinces,
situated on the east side of the Ganges. The
Soobah of Bahar was given to Kotebeddeen Kokul-
tash; Allah Beg obtained Sircar Jownpoor; and
Tunnem Bahadre Sircar Culpee, all as jageers.
Besides thus disposing of those valuable provinces,
he seized thirty lakhs of rupees that were in the
royal treasury of Bahar.’

The affection which Akber still entertained for
Sileem, only served to increase his affliction, when
he received intelligence of his proceedings. He
wrote him a letter, wherein he expatiated upon his
ingratitude and threatened him with the divine
vengeance, for his undutiful and rebellious conduct.
Shereef, the son of Khojeh Abdulsemed, of whom
the emperor entertained favourable sentiments,
was known to be attached tothe prince ; and Akber
flattered himself that by entrusting the negotiation
to his management, matters might yet be accom-
modated so as to preclude the necessity of proceed-
ing to rigorous measures. Sileem received the
letter with every mark of dutiful respect, and was

1 E, D. VI, 99; A. N. (Text) III, 831; M. J. 13 ; Khaf. I, 218.
2M. J. 13. |

SULTAN SILEEM |

so much affected at its contents, that he a¢ first
resolved to go to his father and throw himself upon
his clemency; but upon reflection, did not think it
prudent to expose himself to the effects of his just
resentment at that time. He retained in his
service the Emperor’s messenger Shereef, who from
that time became his confidential friend ; and the
very day that he mounted the throne, he made
the traitor, his prime minister.!

Akber was so much grieved at his son’s
behaviour, and alarmed for the peace of the empire,
that it became the primary object of his attention,
to endeavour to bring back the prince to a proper
sense of his duty. He, therefore, quitted his
military pursuits in the Dekhan, at the time when
his arms were most successful; and leaving the
command of the army to the Khankhanan and
Sheikh Abulfazel, returned to, Agra.’

A. H. 1010—A. D. 1601.

Some time after the Emperor’s return to Agra,
Sultan Sileem resolved to pay him a visit in that
capital, and set out accompanied by thirty thousand
cavalry. Akber was naturally alarmed when he
heard that Sileem was coming with such a force;
and Jafer Beg Asof Khan, the dewan, who had
always opposed the interest of the prince, was so
terrified that he entertained thoughts of destroying
himself, and when the prince arrived at Etawah,
Asof Khan’s jageer, he sent him a present ofa
very valuable ruby. At this place Sileem received

1 ALN, HI, 831, E.D. VI, 99; M.J. 14; Khaf. I, 220; Maasir. ITI, 626.
2 Du Jarric, 182.

8 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

a letter from his father, telling him that he could
not help entertaining unfavourable suspicions of
his pretended visit; that it was not the custom for
a subject to visit his king at the head of a powerful
army; that if in so doing, he had no other object
in view, than the displaying of his magnificence
and power, he had already effectually accomplished
that purpose ; and therefore had nothing to do but
disband his troops, and come to court alone: but
that if he entertained any doubt of his Majesty’s
sincerity, and had come thus attended to guard
himself from danger, he had better return to
Allahabad, and not think of an interview till his
mind was entirely freed from apprehension and
distrust... Sileem, in his answer, entreated his
father to believe, that he had no other wish than
to throw himself at his Majesty’s feet after so long
an absence; but that in obedience to his royal
command, he should go back to Allahabad without
having enjoyed that happiness, and return whenever
it might be the Emperor’s pleasure to order him to
court.

Whilst Sileem remained at Etawah, he received
a second letter from his father, wherein he bestow-
ed upon him in jageer, the subahs of Bengal and
Orissa, and directed him to send forces to take
possession thereof.* The prince did not think it
prudent to detach any part of his troops at this
juncture: he, however, invented some plausible

excuses for the delay in the execution of the order,
1 Du Jarric, pp. 182-3,
$M. J., 15-17; Takmil (E. D. VI, 105); Khaf. I, 221-2; De Laet (Lethbridge)
P, 198 : Du Jarric (Ch. X111, p. 113),

SULTAN SILEEM . 9

and with which the Emperor appeared to be
satisfied.

Sileem led back his army, and when he arrived
at Allahabad displayed all the insignia of royalty,
and conferred titles of honour upon his adherents.!

In so critical a juncture, the Emperor wishing
to avail himself of the faithful and prudent counsel
of Abulfazel, ordered him to repair to Agra with all
possible expedition. Sileem was conscious of the
enormity of his own conduct : he dreaded the effects
of Abulfazel’s sage advice, which having been ever
directed to the welfare of the empire, and the
true interest and dignity of his royal master,
might, on the present occasion, have operated so
far to the disadvantage of the prince, as to have
obstructed his accession to the throne, at the death
of his father, who was now far advanced in years ;
he, therefore, formed the base resolution of having
him assassinated.’

A. H. 1011-—A. D. 1602.

The country of Nersingh Deo?’ lay in the road
from the Dekhan to Agra; and as this Rajah was
then ranked amongst the lawless and unsubjected
chieftains, he was easily prevailed upon by the
promise of a considerable reward, to execute the
foul murder. Accordingly, when Abulfazel arrived
at Berkeh Serai, ten cose from Gualiar, he was
attacked by a large body of the Rajah’s people.
He made a gallant resistance, but was soon over-

2 De Laet (Lethbridge) 198 ; Du Jarric, 183; Maclagan, 88-9.

2R.B.1, 245; M. J. (E. D. V. 442-3]; Price (p. 56) assigns religious
motives for the act; Khaf. I. 223; Maasir. I, 122-3, 423 ; Du Jarric 83.
8 Bir Singh is the correct name.

40 : HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

powered by numbers, and slain; and Nersingh Deo
sent his head to Sileem at Allahabad.' Although
this affair gave Akber great uneasiness, yet it
enabled Sileem to go to court without fear or
apprehension; and in a short space of time to
convert the doubts and jealousy of his father into
confidence and satisfaction; for shortly after this
event, Akber sent to Allahabad, Selima Sultana
Begum,? Sileem’s mother, to quiet his appre-
hensions and prevail upon him to repair to court.
The prince advanced two days journey to meet his
mother, conducted her to Allahabad with every
mark of respect ; and, without hesitation, consented
to return with her to Agra. When he approached
near to Agra, he wrote to his father, that in con-
sequence of his kind permission, he was come to
make his humble submissions. He entreated that
Meriam Mekany,’ out of her maternal goodness,
would receive him under her immediate protection,
and begged that the astrologers might determine
the fortunate hour for the interview. The letter
was entrusted to Khojeh Doast Mohammed. The
Emperor, on receipt of it, repaired to the apart-
ments of Meriam Mekany, who cheerfully under-
took to comply with Sileem’s request. Akber, in
his answer, kindly told Sileem that there was no
necessity to consult the astrologers, as for such a
meeting every hour must be fortunate.

*xR. B. I, 25; Price 55-6, The trunk was interred at Antari. Asad Beg.
E. D. VI, 156-60; Takmil, E. D. VI, 107; M.J. E.D. VI, 442-4,

. 2 Widow of Bairam Khan and cousin of Akbar who married her after
Bairam's death, R. B. I, 232, Gulbadan Begum’s Humayun Nama (Beve-
ridge) 276.81; Khaf 1,276. gk

5 Hamida Banu Begum, his grand-mother. —

SULTAN SILEEM 11

Sileem hereupon hastened to Agra, and at the
distance of a day’s journey from that city was met
by Meriam Mekany, who conducted him to her
apartments, and there presented him to the
Emperor. The prince flung himself at the feet of
his father, who raised him from the ground, and
after the most tender and affectionate embraces,
led him to the presence chamber.' Two days after-
wards the Emperor gave him one of his finest
elephants, and then taking off his own turban
placed it upon the head of the prince, and publicly
declared him his successor in the Empire.

Akber now represented to Sultan Sileem, that
the former expedition against the Ranna having
failed through his means, it behoved him to re-
trieve his reputation by concluding that war in
person. The prince cheerfully acquiesced in all
that his father proposed; many of the principal
munsebdars were nominated for this service; and
proper supplies of every kind ordered to be provided
without delay. The prince, after taking an affec-
tionate leave of his father, marched to Futtehpoor,
and remained there some days in expectation of
receiving the promised supplies; but the officers
of Government making no progress therein, he
saw plainly that they wished to bring him into
disgrace by the failure of the expedition for want
of proper support. He freely communicated his
sentiments to his father, setting forth that his
troops were already considerably in arrears ; and

1R.B. I, 65; M. J. 18-9; Anfaul Akbar E.D. VI, 247; De Laet (tr.
Lethbridge.) 1 p. 199; Hadi, 11-12. .

12 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

that as the Ranna would doubtless protract the war
as much as possible, by taking refuge in his moun-
tains, it would be fruitless to engage in such an
expedition without very ample resources; but
seeing that the Emperor’s officers were not dis-
posed to furnish him with the necessary aids, he
humbly entreated permission to pay his respects
once more to his Majesty, for the purpose of
obtaining leave to return to Allahabad;’ from
whence he would undertake the expedition at his
own expense.

The Emperor, upon the receipt of the prince’s
representation, sent Buhkt-ul-Nessa Begum, his
own sister, to tell him that he had permission to
return to Allahabad, but that having taken his
leave in a fortunate hour, the astrologers foretold
that another meeting, during the present conjunc-
tion of the planets, would be attended with ill
consequences: however, that after having stayed
a short time at Allahabad, he might return again
to Agra.” The prince accordingly marched from
Futtehpoor, and crossing the Jumna at Mehtra,
proceeded to Allahabad: and on his arrival there,
he made great rejoicings for the reconciliation
that had so happily taken place between him and
his father.

The death of Khusru’s mother happened about
this time. She inherited a melancholy disposition
from her family : and the undutiful behaviour of

her son,?* in making use of every opportunity to
_ 4 Khaf, I, 225-6; M.J. 2
2 Takmil (ED. VI, fio: Khaf, 225-6; Maclagan, 91-2.
® Terry, p. 4 ‘

SULTAN SILEEM 13

prejudice Akber against his father, so worked
upon her imagination that taking the opportu-
nity of her husband’s absence upon an hunting
party she destroyed herself! by alarge dose of
opium. Sileem was along time inconsolable for
the loss of this amiable princess, who, besides a
large share of beauty, possessed a fine understand-
ing, with a most engaging softness and affability
of manners. Akber sincerely partook of his
sorrow, and wrote him a very affectionate and
consolatory letter * on the occasion.

Although the Emperor had seemingly acquies-
ced in Sileem’s arguments for returning to
Allahabad, yet was he by no means satisfied with
this pretext for delaying the expedition against
the Ranna: and the prince’s enemies made use of
the occasion to rekindle the Emperor’s jealousy,
by ascribing this conduct to ambitious designs
against the peace of the empire. To add to the
Emperor’s displeasure Sileem had unhappily, at
this time, been guilty of an act of cruelty, which
furnished but too just grounds of complaint against
him. A wakianavess, or intelligencer, and two
other servants belonging to Sileem, had formed a
conspiracy against his life; in which being detec-
ted, they attempted to make their escape to Sultan
Daniel, in the Dekhan; but their flight was soon
discovered, and some horsemen being sent in pur-
suit of them, quickly brought them back. Sileem
was so exasperated against them, that in the fury

3 R, BI, 55-6; Takmil. E. D. VI, p. 112; M. U.E., 405.
2 R. B. 1, 55-6; Takmil. E. D, VI, p. 112,

14 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

of his passion he ordered the wakianavess to be
flead, one of the accomplices to be castrated and
the other severely beaten. These cruel punish-
ments which were executed in his presence, put an
end to the conspiracy; neither were there any more
desertions. This transaction, in itself sufficiently
culpable, was reported to the Emperor with all the
exaggeration that malice could invent. The crimi-
nals were represented as innocent sufferers; and
it was asserted that the prince commonly practised
such barbarities in the paroxisms of inebriation, a
vice to which in common with his two brothers, he
was unfortunately very much addicted. Akber, who
possessed a mind fraught with every principle of
philanthropy and humanity, was shocked at these
accounts of his son’s barbarity. He wrote him a
letter, in which he severely reprobated his conduct,
and said that not being able himself to see a sheep
stripped of its skin without sensations of horror, he
was at a loss to conceive how it was possible for
his son, so far to stifle the common feelings of
nature, as to suffer a fellow creature to be flead in
his presence.!
A. H. 1012—A. D. 1603.

The Emperor now resolved to go himself to
Allahabad, to compel Sileem to come to Agra. He
accordingly sent on his tents to the distance of
three cose ; and at night, unattended, got into a
boat in order to proceed thither; but in the middle
of the way, the boat struck upon a sand and was

immovable. At daybreak some of the nobility
’ Takmil. E.D, VI, pp. 112-3.

SULTAN SILEEM : 15

arrived in their boats to his relief; but the astro-
logers thought this accident a bad omen and
recommended to Akbar to return to Agra; he,
however, rejected their advice, and proceeded to
the encampment. The next day it rained very
hard, and he received intelligence that Meriam
Mekany, who had always been averse to this
journey, was takenill. The rain continuing with
incessant violence for two days, the whole encamp-
ment was inundated, and, excepting the royal
pavilion, not a tent was left standing. The third
night a messenger arrived to inform him that the
physicians despaired of his mother’s life; upon
which he hastened back, in hopes of receiving the
last blessing from his beloved parent. But he
found her speechless, in which state she continued
five days longer, and then expired. The Emperor,
according to the custom of his ancestors, shaved
his head and beard, and put on a mourning habit;
and his example was followed by thousands of all
ranks. He assisted in carrying the corpse some
paces, after which he returned to the presence
chamber. The nobility by turns bore the body to
Delhi, where they arrived in thirty-one hours. The
body was depositedin the mausoleum of Hemayun.
The day after the funeral, the Emperor and his
court laid aside their mourning habits; and he
bestowed dresses and other valuable presents upon
the nobility and the officers of his household.

As soon as Sultan Sileem heard of his father’s

ee Takmil. E.D. VI, p. 113; M.J. P. 22; Khaf.’I, 228-30; De Jarric,

“16 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

intention to come to Allahabad, and that he had
been prevented by the death of Meriam Mekany,
he dispatched Shereef to the Subah of Bahar and
set out immediately for Agra; to strive to remove
the prejudices which the Emperor had conceived
against him, as well as to partake of his sorrow for
the death of the Begum. His father received him
with open arms; and his enemies began to be
apprehensive for their safety, from this sudden and
unexpected reconciliation. When the court broke
up, Akber conducted Sileem to the seraglio. Here
the Emperor gave full vent to his rage, and after
reprimanding the prince in the severest terms for
his misconduct, told him that having theard his
brain was turned from his excessive drunkenness,
he must remain there some days, in order that, if
the report proved true, a proper remedy might be
applied to his distemper. He was confined in the
oratory, but his mother and sisters were allowed to
visit him; and they encouraged him to submit
patiently to this treatment, by assuring him that it
-would terminate to his advantage. He remained
there ten days,’ during which time he entirely
abstained from liquor and opium; and behaved in
every respect so much to the Emperor’s satis-
faction that thenceforward he was permitted
to come to court and restored to that degree of
favour and affection which he had before possessed.
A. H. 10183—A. D. 1604.
But an accident which happened a few days

1 The anthorities differ as regards the exact number of days. Ten is
the number to which the most reliable of them incline. Du Jarric, 189.

SULTAN SILEEM 17

after Sileem’s enlargement was near creating a
fresh misunderstanding between him and the
Emperor. Sileem was possessed of a very famous
elephant named Geeranbar, who was an over-match
for any one in the royal stables; but Khusru had an
elephant named Aproop, which he was desirous
should enter the lists against his father’s. Akber
gave orders for the fight, and, according to the
custom, one of the royal elephants was directed to
be ready on the spot, to assist against the conqueror.
Sileem, and his son Khusru, obtained the Emperor’s
permission to mount their horses, in order to be
near the elephants ; while the young prince Khorum
(afterwards Shahjehan) was seated at a window
by the side of his grandfather. The combat
began; Khusru’s elephant soon gave way, and the
Emperor’s was pushing forward to support him
against the conqueror; but a number of people for
some time refused to let the royal elephant pass
before Sileem’s horse, and flung stones, one of
which cut the Emperor’s elephant driver on the
side of his head and some blood issued from the
wound; however, he pressed on, and at length
brought his elephant into action. The insidious
Khusru galloped away to the Emperor, and told
him that the disturbance had been occasioned by
his father, who had secretly given directions to his
people not to suffer the royal elephant to engage.
The Emperor sent young Khorum to tell his father
how much he was displeased at him and to desire
to know what had induced him to behave in such
an extraordinary manner. Khorum delivered the
3—4

18 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

Emperor’s message in the most respectful terms,
and Sileem desired him to assure the Emperor,
that so far from conniving at, he had actually
quelled the disturbance. By this time Khusru’s
elephant had run away, and Sileem’s gained such
superiority over the imperial one, that his life was
in danger. All attempts to part them proved in
vain, till at length they plunged together into the
river, where they were separated by the inter-
position of some people in boats: Khorum re-
turned to his grandfather, and proved to his satis-
faction the falsity of Khusru’s accusation.'

On Monday the 20th of Jemady ul Awwel,
A. H. 1014, or 13th August 1605, Akber was seized
with a fever,? the violence of which greatly
alarmed his physicians. At this juncture Sileem
received secret intelligence that a party, at the
head of which were Mansingh, Khusru’s uncle, and
Khan Azem, his father-in-law, had formed a design
of raising Khusru to the throne, upon the death of
the Emperor: he therefore did not think it prudent
to put himself in the power of the conspirators by
venturing into the fort of Agra to visit his father.®
But young Khorum could not be prevailed
upon to leave the Emperor for a moment, although
his mother went on purpose to bring him away,
and remonstrated with him on the danger to which
he exposed himself, by remaining amongst his

3 Asad Beg E. D. VI, pp. 168-9.
; Pree is 125-35, gives an account differi i

found in R. B. Tod’s Rajasthan (Routledge) II, OO? whee eet

account ; Asad Beg, E. D. VI, pp. 169-70; MaasirI, 327;
Review) 1-11, 1871, p. 77, asir I, 327; De Laet (Calcutta

SULTAN SILEEM 19

enemies; all entreaties were in vain, and he
declared that no consideration should separate
him from his beloved grandfather, as long as there
remained in him any signs of life.

At length the conspirators, finding themselves
discovered, began to entertain doubts of their suc-
cess; and after some debate they agreed that it
would be most prudent to lay aside their design
till a more favourable opportunity. They accord-
ingly waited upon Sileem, and swore to act in
obedience to his authority. The next day he
visited the Emperor in his last moments.!

On the night of the 13th of Jemady-ul-Sany, or
October 13th, 1605, Akber expired, and the next
day was interred with great pomp in the cemetery
at Secundra. He was born in A. H. 949, or A. D.
1542 ; ascended the throne in 963, or A. D. 1556, at
the age of fourteen, and died after a glorious reign
of forty-nine solar years ; aged sixty-three solar
years and one day.”

He had three sons, Sultan Sileem, now Jehan-
gir; Sultan Morad, who died by excessive drinking
in A. H. 1007, or A. D. 1598, in the Dekhan; and
Sultan Daniel, who died by the like debauch also
in the Dekhan, in A. H. 1013, or A. D. 1604: and
three daughters Shahzadeh Khanun; Sheker-ul-
Nissa Begum ; and Aram Banu Begum.

1 Price, pp. 125-35.

3 Takmil, E. D. VI, p. 115; Asad Beg E. D. VI, pp. 170-2; Du Jarric,
203-5; M. J. 29; Khaf. I, 235; Du Jarric and Bartoli (Mr. V. A. Smith's Akbar,
p. 326), assert that Akbar died of poison. Seéalso Tod I, 279, and II,’ 385;
Terry, 408-9; Herbert, p. 72, Peter Mundy II, 102-3. :

THE
HISTORY OF HINDOSTAN.

VOL. I.
JEHANGIR.

On Thursday, the 20th of Jemady-ul-Sany;,
A. H. 1014, corresponding with the 22nd of October,
A. D. 1605,1 Sultan Sileem ascended the throne
at Agra, and assumed the following titles: Abul-
mozuffer Noureddeen Mohammed Jehangir, or the Father
of Victory, the Light of Religion, Mohammed, the Con-
queror of the World.

He tells us, in his own memoirs, that the first
order he issued, on his accession to the throne,
was for the construction of the golden chain of
justice,” which we shall describe particularly
amongst his other regulations. He confirmed all
the laws that had been enacted by his father, and
issued an edict containing twelve institutes,’ or
regulations, remarkable for the humanity, justice,
and political sagacity that pervade them, and
which we shall detail in the proper place.

A. H. 1014—A. D. 1605.
The following appointments and promotions‘

immediately took place :—On Syeed Khan, one

1 According..to R.B. I, p. 5, 24th October, 1605; Price, gives p. 2, 10th
October, 1605. Jahangir was 37 years 3 months old at the time according to the
Lunar calendar and 36 yearsand 1 month by Solar reckoning. His accession
was on the eighth day after Akbar's death, Du Jarric. III, xvi.

_ *® Price, p. 8.
' ® Price, p. 8; R. B. 1, 7-10; 15,

*R. B. I, 13-16; 18.

§ Price, p. 26,

JEHANGIR 21

of Akber’s confidential omrahs, was conferred the
Government of the Punjab ; Sheikh Fereed Bokh-
aree,! the late Emperor’s Meer Bukhshee*, was
confirmed in his office ; Mokeem, to whom Akber,
in the latter end of his reign, had given the title of
Vizier Khan,? was now appointed to the office of
Vizier ul Memalek* jointly with Jan Beg, to whom
Jehangir, before he came to the throne, had given
the title of Vizier ul Mulk **: Rajah Mansingh
was appointed Subahdar of Bengal: Khojehgee
Futtehullah, Abdulrezak Mamoory, both Bukshees,
or Paymasters, and Ameenneddeen, all officers of
the late Emperor, were confirmed in their respec-
tive posts ; and all the inferior public servants,
with those of the harem, continued to enjoy their
accustomed stipends. Shereef Khan,3 who had
been appointed Subahdar of Bahar, during the time
of Akber, was now promoted to the high dignities
of Vakeel ul Sultanet***, and Ameer ul Omrah.****
Khan Azem was retained about the Emperor’s
person, with every mark of confidence and respect.

The Ranna of Oudypoor, having shaken off the
yoke upon the death of Akber, Jehangir, in order
to reduce him to obedience, sent against him his
second son, Sultan Purveiz, with an arm; of twenty

1 Price, p. 29.

* Paymaster-General.

2 Price 49-50,

“Grand Vizier: during the reign of Jehangir, this office was generally
executed by two persons jointly.

**Vizier of the Empire.

3 Price, 30. .

***For a particular account of the office of Vakeel ul Sultanet, see the
Preface to the English Translation of the Ayeen Akbery, Vol. I, page iv,
quarto edition.

****The prince of princes.

22 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

thousand cavalry ;} but the prince, being only
sixteen years of age, the actual command was
entrusted to Asof Khan, in the quality of Ataleek,
or Tutor.2. When they took their leave of
Jehangir, he charged them, that if either the Ranna
or his son Kurrun came out to meet them with
tokens of submission, they should receive him
kindly, and not commit any hostility upon the
country. The Emperor was actuated to this
moderate conduct by two motives. The vast
territory of Mawerelnehr* being at this time in
great confusion without a head; and the Dekhan
having been but partly subdued by Akber, he was
tempted to look to the conquest of the former
kingdom, and to the finishing, in the latter quarter,
what his father had begun. But whilst so powerful
a prince as the Ranna of Oudypoor continued
unsubdued, it would have been highly imprudent
to have engaged himself in foreign expeditions.

In the first month of his reign, Jehangir had,
by one of his concubines, male twins, whom he
called Jehandar and Sheriar. ‘

Lallah Beg Behadre,* who had shewn a
faithful attachment to the Emperor in the lifetime
of his father, he now promoted to a munseb of 4000,
gave him a present of 20,000 rupees, and appointed
him Soobahdar of Bahar. At the same time Vizier
Khan was appointed Dewan** of Bengal.

1 R.B. 1,16; Iqbal, 7; M.J., p. 36; Khaf. I, 249,

2 Price 54-5 : For his life see M. J. I. 282-7.

3 R.B, I, 26.

.™ The country beyond the river Jihoon or Oxus ; Transoxonia.
4 Price 35, gives a wrong description R. B. I, 20.

5 Price 40-1; R. B. I,
“*The Superintendent “a the collection of the revenues.

JEHANGIR 23

Rajah Nersingh Deo’, who, at the instigation
.of Jehangir, had put to death, the great Abulfazel,
was in the first year of his reign promoted to a
munseb of 3000.

A. H. 1014—A. D. 1606.

Jehangir had reigned only six months, when
his eldest son, Sultan Khusru,* appeared in open
rebellion against him. It has already been men-
tioned that during Akber’s last illness, Rajah
Mansingh, * Khusru’s maternal uncle, and Azem
Khan his father-in-law, in conjunction with others
of the Omrahs, who, from having always opposed
the interest of Sultan Sileem, dreaded that when
he came to the throne, they should become the
victims of his resentment, instilled ambitious
notions into the mind of young Khusru, which
led him to form the resolution of disputing the
crown with his father; when a favourable oppor-
tunity should offer; and which they persuaded
him was not then far distant, as the nobility
in general were caballing, in order to be ready
to take advantage of the confusion that might
naturally be looked for at the death of Akber.‘
But the unexpected reconciliation which fortu-
nately took place between the Emperor and Sultan
Sileem, dissolved the conspiracy and put him in
quiet possession of the Empire.’ The :rebellious

designs of Khusru, and his party, being thereby
1 He was Bir Singh, generally styled Narsingh by the.Persian Chronic-
les R.B. I, 24-5.
2 Roe, 247, 256, 289, 299.
3 See R. B. I, 138 for Jahangir’s opinion of Raja Man Singh.
4 Asad Beg, E. D. VI 169-70, Price, 124-5.
5 Asad Bag, E, D. VI, 170-2.

24- HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

frustrated, he was observed to be uncommonly
melancholy, and thoughtful, as if meditating some
desperate enterprise; and all his father’s endea-/
vours to gain his confidence and affection, by every
act of royal favour and paternal indulgence,’ had
no effect upon him. He continued in this state till
the 8th of the month Zilhejeh, or April 8th, 1606;
when, at night, under pretence of visiting the tomb
of his grandfather, Akber, he departed from the
fort of Agra, with about an hundred and fifty
horsemen. His flight was immediately discovered
to Jan Beg, the Vizier, by one of his link-boys, who
happened to be known to that minister.? The
Vizier, without loss of time, carried the man to the
Ameer ul Omrah, who after examining him, and
being convinced of the truth of his report from the
consistency of his story, ran alone to the palace,
and calling out one of the eunuchs of the Serai*
desired him to present his duty to his Majesty,
and inform him, that he had some very important
intelligence, which required instant communica-
tion. Jehangir, from whose memoirs we have
taken this account,’ says, he had no conception of
what had really happened; but imagined that some
intelligence had arrived either from the Dekhan or
Gujerat. When the Ameer ul Omrah had disclosed
the matter to him, they consulted together on the
measures most proper to be taken. The Emperor

1R.B.1,12. A lakh of rupees was given to him for the repair of Munim
Khan's Mansion at Agra to be used as his residence. Price p. 26. Jahangir says
he was constrained to imprison Khusru in the upper part of the royal tower in
the castle of Agra from which he should have escaped.

® Price p. 113.

* The women’s spartments and seraglio.
5 R, B.I, 51-70. .

JEHANGIR 25

proposed that either himself, or Sultan Khorum,
his third son, should go in pursuit of the fugitive:
to both of which proposals the Ameer ul Omrah
started objections, and offered his own services,
which were accordingly accepted. He asked his
Majesty what course he was to take, provided the
prinee should refuse to listen to reason. The
Emperor answered that if Khusru did not peace-
ably surrender himself, the Ameer ul Omrah
should not be responsible for any measures that
he might think it advisable to pursue, adding the
following political maxim: ‘“ That when the peace
of an empire is at stake, no regard must be paid
even to our children, for that a King has no rela-
tions”. The Ameer ul Omrah took his leave; but
after some further consideration, the Emperor,
reflecting upon the inveterate hatred which the
Prince bore towards this minister, did not choose
to expose him to the effects of his resentment, in
case, through any misfortune, he should fall into
his hands. He, therefore, ordered him back, and
sent in his stead Sheikh Fareed Bokharee with
such a body of troops as he could hastily collect,
accompanied by Ehtemam Khan, the Cutwal*.
His Majesty resolved to follow the next morning,
at the head of a considerable force.!

Ahamed Beg Khan, and Doast Mohammed
who had that day taken their leave of his Majesty
to visit their native country, happened to be

at Secundra, when Khusru arrived there, and they
* Superintendent of the Police.

1 Price 116-7 mentions 40,000 horses and 100,000 camels as baving
been brought out and distributed amongst the soldiers and armies.

>): ne HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

hastening back to Agra, confirmed the other man’s
report, with the additional information, that
Khusru intended to proceed to Penjab, The
Emperor suspected that he would soon quit that
road, and retire to Bengal, to Rajah Mansingh, the
Soobahdar, who was his maternal uncle; but it was
soon afterwards ascertained that he had actually
pursued the way to Penjab.

When Khusru arrived at Mehtra, he met with
Hassan Beg Bedakhshee, on his way to Agra from
Cabul from which Government he had lately been
dismissed, Khusru easily persuaded him to join
his party with about three hundred men, and
return with him to Penjab. They attacked and
plundered every one who fell in their way, and
seized some horses, upon which they mounted
their infantry ; even women and children did not
escape their fury ; and they burnt all the villages
through which they passed. Khusru was much
affected at beholding these scenes of violence and
distress, but was obliged to comply with what he
had not the power to prevent.! At the same time
that he reached Paniput, Dilawer Khan, Governor
of Lahoor, happened to arrive there also, on his
way to that city; and hearing of the rebellion, sent
his women and children across the river Jumnah,
that, returning alone by forced marches, he might
be able to reach Lahoor before Khusru. Near
Paniput, he met with Abdulraheem, whom he
advised to send his family also on the other side of
the Jumnah, and to wait there himself until the

1 Price 220-1.

JEHANGIR 27

Emperor arrived. Dilawer Khan set out immedi-
ately for Lahoor and alarmed all the country
through which he passed with his account of
Khusru’s rebellion, and of the devastations com-
mitted by his followers. Some he engaged to join
him, and others were persuaded to continue neuter.
No sooner was Dilawer Khan departed, than
Abdulraheem acted in direct contradiction to his
advice, and joined Khusru, who gave him the title
of Mallick ul Vuzeerah, or, The Prince of
Viziers.!

At day-break, the Emperor began his march.
When he arrived at Secundra, he made his offerings
at his father’s shrine and then proceeded on his
way. Here Mirza Hussein, one of the sons of
Mirza Sharokh, who had been one of the com-
panions of Khusru’s flight, having lost his way. in
the night, was surprised and taken. Not being
able to deny the fact, he was tied hand and foot
and put upon an elephant.? The sun being intensely
powerful, the Emperor was obliged to halt, during
the heat of the day, under the shade of some trees.
He went on again in the afternoon, and at night
encamped by the side of a tank in the pergunnah
of Mehtra, about twenty-three cose distant from
Agra. On the 10th he marched to Hodal From
this place he sent forward a choice body of men,
commanded by Sheikh-Fereed Bokharee. On the
lith the Emperor marched to Palwal; and on
the 12th to Feredabad. On the 13th he arrived at

1 Price 141. R. B. I, 59.

*R. BI, 58.
3 Manucci I, 71.

28 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

Delhi where he paid his devotions at the tomb of
Hemayun; on the 14th he arrived at Nereyleh
Serai, which place, Khusru in his march, had burnt
down. The 15th he halted. The 16th he marched
to Paniput. The 17th he marched to Kernal;
halted on the 18th, and on the 19th proceeded to
Shahabad, where he halted some days. Dilawer
Khan having thrown himself into Lahoor, with a
considerable reinforcement, was very active in
putting that place in a posture of defence, in
which he was cheerfully assisted by all the garri-
son as well as the inhabitants of the city.’ Two
days after his arrival, Khusru besieged the place
and promised his men, that they should have the
plundering of the city for seven days. The
besiegers set fire to one of the city gates, but the
active Dilawer Khan stopped their progress, by
building up a wall withinside. The same day
Sayeed Khan, with a body of troops from Cash-
meer, happening to encamp on the banks of the
Chenab, where he heard of the rebellion, hastened
to the relief of Lahoor; and at night he and his
party were received into the fort.

When Khusru had laid before Lahoor six
days, he received intelligence that the imperial
army was advancing against him.‘ By this time,
he had been joined by many of the inhabitants of
Lahoor, which is one of the most populous cities
of Hindoostan, so that he found himself at the

1 Price 140
2 Price 147, R. B

2 R., B. I, 62, iqbal 10, i, Khaf, I, 251.
*R. B, I, 62.

JEHANGIR 29

head of ten or twelve thousand cavalry. He,
therefore, thought it most advisable to raise the
siege, and march to attack the Emperor’s advanced
guard, under the command of Sheikh Fareed, who
was encamped at Sultanpoor. Although it was
night and rained violently, when the Emperor
received advice of Khusru’s motions, he marched
instantly, and arrived the next morning at Sultan-
poor, on the river Bias, where he ‘remained till
noon. Nobody having suspected that a battle
could possibly be fought that day, the Imperial
troops, according to the custom of eastern armies,
had come on in small parties, without observing
any order in their march, and the Emperor was
just sitting down totake a slight repast,’ when
news was brought him that Khusru had attacked
Sheikh Fereed, and the advanced body. He
mounted his horse and flew to the army, attended
only by fifty horsemen. By the time he reached
the bridge of Govindwal, he had collected together
about five hundred men; but here he learnt that
the enemy were totally routed. The news was
brought him by Shumsee Towshekehee, to whom
he instantly gave the title of Khooshkubber
Khan*. Sheikh Fereed gained great honour by
this victory. Sief Khan, of the tribe of Bareh,
who fought under Fereed received seventeen
wounds. The band of this tribe, who were not
above sixty in number, cut to pieces’ a great many

1 Price 149. ,

? For account of battle see price 151.

* The Khan, or Lord, who brings glad tidings.

3 R, B. I, 64 says that ‘the Sayyids of Barha having received wounds
from 1500 Badakshani horsemen had been cut to pieces.’

30 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

of the Bedakshian cavalry* As soon as they
perceived them giving way, they cried out GOD
SAVE THE EMPEROR when the rebels imagin-
ing Jehangir was actually arrived, fled with the
utmost precipitation. A box of jewels, and other
things of great value, belonging to Khusru, were
left on the field of battle.

The very night that Khusru fled from Agra,
the Emperor had dispatched Rajah Bassoo to his
Zemindary in the mountains of Lahoor, with
orders to seize Khusru if he appeared in that
quarter; and at the same time Mehabut Khan, and
Mirza Aly Akber were sent with a body of troops,
to follow him wherever they could hear of him.

On the 28th of Zilhejeh, or 26th April, the
imperial army encamped at Chaul,? seven cose
from Lahoor. After the battle of Govindwal, the
forces of Khusru dispersed, so that he was left
only with a few Afghans, who had been long in
his service; and Hassan Beg’s party which was
now very inconsiderable. The Afghans advised
him to return to Agra and create disburbances in
that quarter; but Hassan Beg having left his
family and treasure at Cabul, pressed him to
repair thither. This advice he, unfortunately for
himself, embraced, when all the Afghans deserted
him. In the night, after the battle, Khusru,
Abdulraheem and Hassan Beg, with a small party,

arrived on the Banks of the Chenab, intending to

* According to the Masir Jehangiry, the incredible—‘' Padshah Salamat '
Jong J live the King.
1 The box fell into the hands of some persons who, according to Price
Pp. Ws were never discov
Elliot VI, 299 calls it ‘ Jahan.’

JEHANGIR 31

have crossed over at the ferry of Shahpoor ; but
not finding a boat there, they proceeded to Soodra.
Here were lying two boats, one empty and without
men, and the other loaded with firewood and straw.
They forced the people out of the loaded boat, into
the empty one, but neither promises nor threats
could engage them to use their oars. Immediately
upon the defeat of Khusru’s army, orders had been
issued tothe guards at all the ferries in Penjab,
not to suffer any person to pass unexamined; and
the watermen were afraid to offend against so
positive an order at such a critical time. The
Chowdry* of Soodra, hearing a violent noise at the
ferry, hastened thither, and found that some
persons wanted to cross over although it was
night. He therefore called out to them to stop, as
it was the Emperor’s positive command, that no.
person should pass the river, who could not give a
good account of himself. The noise raised the
neighbourhood, and both sides of the river were
soon lined with people. The Chowdry took off the
rudder of the boat, and Hassan Beg having forced
it from the shore, it drove down with the stream
till day break, when its progress was stopped by a
sand upon which it stuck so fast, that all efforts to
get it off were in vain. Abul Cossim and Khojeh
Khyzir Khan, by order of Hillal Khan, had
now possessed themselves of the western bank
of the river, and the east side was defended by
the zemindars. This Hillal Khan, just: before
the rebellion broke out, had been ordered to join

* Inferior Zemindar,

eS

a HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

the army of Saiyeed Khan, in Cashmeer, and

arrived here at this juncture on his way to that
Subah. Khusru’s party let fly some arrows; but
such feeble resistance answered no purpose; men,
mounted on elephants plunged into the river, and
being joined by others in boats, the Prince and his
party were easily made prisoners.!

A. H. 1015—A. D. 1606.

The next morning Kbusru was brought before
his father, with a chain fastened from his left
hand to his left foot, according to the laws of
Chenghez Khan. On the right hand of the Prince
stood Hassan Beg and on his left Abdulraheem.
Khusru trembled and wept. He was ordered into
confinement ; but the companions of his rebellion
were put to death with cruel torments. Hassan
Beg was sewed up in the raw hide of an ox, and
Abdulraheem in that of an ass, and both were led
about the town on asses, with their faces towards
the tail? The ox’s hide became so dry and con-
tracted, that before the evening Hassan Beg was
suffocated: but the ass’s hide being continually
moistened with water, by the friends of Abdul-
raheem, he survived the punishment, and after-
wards obtained the Emperor’s pardon. From the
garden of Kamran to the city of Lahoor, two rows
of stakes were fixed in the ground, upon which the
other rebels were impaled alive ;* and the unhappy

Khusru, mounted on an elephant, was conducted

2 Price gives a different account of the way in which Kbusru fell into the
hands of the Imperialists, p. 151.
_ * Du Jarric gives a detailed account of the punishment.
' ® Price 153.


JAHANGIR’S INDIA

JEHANGIR 33

between the ranks of these miserable sufferers.!

The Emperor honoured Sheikh Fereed with
the title of Mortiza Khan ; and the zemindars who
had shown their loyalty, during the insurrection,
were rewarded by a grant of Seyurghal’*, of all the
country situated between the rivers Biah and
Chenab.

In order to protect Agra, and prevent further
insurrections, the Emperor, at the time he marched
against Sultan Khusru, had sent orders for Sultan
Purveiz, and Asof Khan to repair to that quarter
with part of the army; leaving the rest employed
against the Ranna. Fortunately, before Purveiz
received these orders, he had concluded a peace
with the Ranna; who had sent to the Prince one
of his relations, named Nagh, to make his submis-
sion to the Emperor.? Khusru’s rebellion was so
suddenly quashed, that Purveiz had not time to
reach Agra, before he received fresh orders from
his father to repair to Lahoor.

The Jageerdars of the provinces of Ferah and
Seistan, headed by the Governor of Herat, on the
part of Shah Abbass, King of Persia, thinking the
death of Akber and Khusru’s rebellion, favourable
conjunctures for such an enterprise, laid siege to
the fortress of Kandahar. Shah Beg Khan, the
Governor, after strengthening the fortification,
defended the place with an intrepidity bordering

upon rashness; exposing himself to the view of
1 Gladwin makes no mention of the sad fate of the Sikh Guru Arjun Singh
who was put to death for the favour he had shown to Khusru at the time of his

bellion.
renee For a description of this kind of grant, vide Ayeen Akbari, vol. I, Pp. 280,

9R,B.1. 74, A truce was concluded near Manéalgarh,
| 3

34 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

the besiegers from the upper works, where he sat
drinking and carousing, as if it had been a time of
perfect peace and security. He made several
gallant sallies, and cut to pieces a considerable
number of the assailants, who were making prepa-
rations for converting the siege into a blockade.
As soon asthe Emperor received intelligence of
these transactions, he sent a large reinforcement
to the relief of the place under the command of
Mirza Ghazi, accompanied by Sirdar Khan, and
other officers of high rank. The Emperor could
not help admiring the intrepidity of Shah Beg
Khan; but, did not, however, think it advisable to
continue in the command of soimportant a fortress,
one, whose conduct was at the same time so rash
and inconsiderate; he was, therefore, removed to
the Subahdary of Cabul, and Sirdar Khan appointed
in his stead Governor of Kandahar. When the
army of Mirza Ghazi arrived within six days
march of Kandahar, the enemy raised the siege
and dispersed to their respective habitations.!
Shah Abbass seeing the ill success of the en-
terprise, thought it most prudent to disclaim it;
and accordingly wrote, in angry terms, to Hussein
Khan the Beglerbegy of Khorasan &c. and com-
manded him to withdraw his forces from the siege.
This letter was sent by Hussein Beg, who had
directions, after having settled the commotions in
those parts, to proceed to Jehangir and assure him
of the King of Persia’s entire ignorance of the
plot, and high indignation against the perpetra-
1, B. 1., 70-1; &$-6,

JEHANGIR 35

tors of so scandalous an outrage. Hussein ‘Beg
waited upon Jehangir, at Lahoor, who also,
thinking it most prudent to dissemble upon the
occasion, gave the Persian Ambassador a very
honourable reception.’ Sirdar Khan was soon
after removed, when the joint government of
Kandahar and Tatah was conferred upon Mirza
Ghazi.

About this time Sultan Purveiz, and Asof
Khan, arrived at Lahoor; the former was raised
to the command of ten thousand cavalry, with the
ensign of the Aftabgeer*; the latter also met
with a very gracious reception.

Mocurreb Khan at this time brought from
Burhanpoor, the children of the deceased Sultan
Daniel, three sons, Tehmuras, Baisanker and
Housheng; and three daughters, who were received
by the Emperor with parental affection.

As soon as the rebellion was quelled, the
Emperor sent orders for Miriam-ul-Zemanee, his
own mother, and Rokiah Sultana Begum, another
of Akber’s widows, together with his own wives,
and the young Prince Sultan Khorun, to repair to
Lahoor.

There was now an insurrection at Nagore,
headed by Roysingh and his son Dowleb; which
was quelled by the exertions of Rajah Juggernaut,
and the Imperial troops stationed in Ajmeer.

On the Solar anniversary of the Emperor's
birthday, when he entered into the thirty-olghth

1R. B.1., 85-6; 90;112. -
* Akind of umbrella, an ensign of royalty.

— 86 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

year of his age, he was weighed in the apartments
of Miriam-ul-Zemanee,’ with the usual cere-
monies, eleven ? times; the first time against gold,
and the other ten against silver, and other metals,
perfumes, exhilarating drugs &c. This ceremony
of weighing the Emperor of Hindostan, is perform-
ed twice in every year, on the solar, and on the
lunar anniversary of his birth; and the gold and
other articles are bestowed in charity. During this
festival, Kotebeddeen Koka, whose mother had
suckled the Emperor, and whom he loved with a
brotherly affection, was appointed Subahdar of
Bengal and Orissa, inthe room of Rajah Man-
singh, who was ordered to repair to court. Kote-
beddeen was on this occasion promoted to the rank
of five thousand cavalry ; and Jehangir ordered two
lakhs of rupees to be issued from the treasury for
his particular use, and three lakhs for the payment
of his army.

The nuptials of Sultan Purveiz with the
daughter of his deceased uncle Sultan Morad, were
now celebrated with great magnificence. The
Emperor bestowed upon the princess a present of
one lakh and fifty thousand rupees; besides a lakh
of rupees for his son’s expenses.

Shahbaz Bahadre Kulmac, who had been a long
time in open rebellion in Bengal, now made his sub-
mission to the Emperor, who readily received

him into favour, bestowed upon him a Khunjer *

1 Maryam-Zamani.

® Twelve times according to the Tuzuk:[R. B. I., 78).

* A short sword. The learned Sir William Jones has observed in one of
his discourses addressed to the R. Asiatic Society, that Hanger is a corruption

of Khenje.

JEHANGIR 37

inlaid with precious stones and eight thousand
rupees in money, and promoted him to the com-
mand of a thousand cavalry.

After the celebration of the nuptials, the
Emperor made an_ excursion to Goorjhakun-
deneh, one of the royal hunting seats in Penjab;
leaving Khusru at Lahoor under the charge of
Asof Khan. He was absent from Lahoor about
three months.

Sungram, a powerful and rebellious zemindar of
Bahar, was defeated and killed by Lalla Bazbaha-
dre, who, in reward for this service, was made a
munsebdar of ten thousand,! with the title of
Jehangeer Kuly Khan; and shortly afterwards ob-
tained the Subahdary of Bahar.

About this time, died at Lahoor, the mother of
Kotebeddeen Kokultash.* She had given suck to
the Emperor, and he had always behaved towards
her with the same respect as if she had been his
mother. He assisted in carrying her corpse some
part of the way to the grave, and was so afflicted
for the loss of her, that he refused food, and would
not change his clothes for several days.?

The Emperor now thought proper to declare
Sultan Khorum his heir; his munseb was increas-
ed to eight thousand zat, and five thousand cavalry
of two and three horses ; he was allowed to make
use of the red seraperdah,** a mark of distinction

1 Jahangir (R. B, I., 82-3) says he was promoted to the rank of 4,500 per-
sonal and 3,500 horse in March 1617.

* Kokultash, in the Turkish language, signifies, foster mother.

2 R. B.1., 84-5.

** None but the Imperial tents are covered with red cloth, without a
special permission from the Emperor.

38 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

heretofore peculiar to the Emperor, and Sircar
Hissar was given him in Jageer.!

_ When Baber began the conquest of Hindostan,
the first Jageer which he granted was Sircar Hissar
to his son Hemayun. On Hemayun’s accession to
the throne, he bestowed this place in like manner
upon Akber, who, when he came to the empire,
gave it to Jehangir; and he, in imitation of his
ancestors, conferred it upon the heir apparent.
The royal signet called Ouzek * was committed
to the care of Sultan Khorum, and it was command-
ed, that in all grants and patents he should be
recognised heir apparent.

Abdullah Khan, Governor of Culpee, brought
in chains to the Emperor, Rajah Ramchund, the
rebellious Zemindar of Bundeyleh. Prince Khorum
entreated for his pardon, and had the pleasure of
taking off his chains, and of obtaining for hima
Khelut.2 He was given in charge to Rajah Bassoo
with orders to exact security for his future good
conduct and then to set him at liberty. Abdullah
Khan was immediately rewarded with a munseb of
four thousand, with other marks of royal favour,
and after a short attendance at court, he obtained
in marriage the daughter of Mirza Soliman, Gover-
nor of Bedakshan, a descendant of Abusyed Mirza,
and Sircar Sironje in Malwah, was granted to him
in Jageer.

1 -R. B., 87, 132.
ad The impression of the Ouzek Signet is offered to all Fermons vide,
Ayeen Akbari, vol. I, p. 67.
3 Jahangir (R.B, I., 82, 87) makesno mention of Khurm's intercession but
is fhe credit for himself, Two years later he married Ram Chand's


JEHANGIR 39

A.H. 1016—A.D. 1607.

The Emperor now marched with his army to
Cabul, to reduce to obedience the refractory Afghans
in that neighbourhood. He left Lahoor on the 7th
of Zelhejeh, or 25th March 1607, and arrived at
Cabul on the 18th of Sefer or 3rd June 1607.

About this time, Asof Khan was promoted to
the High office of the Vekalut’, in the room of the
Ameer-ul-Omrah ; on which occasion he presented
to his Majesty a ruby, valued at forty thousand
rupees. Abdul Hussain was appointed his naib.

A few days after the Emperor’s arrival at Cabul,
he visited the tomb of Baber, and gave directions for
laying out an extensive garden adjoining to that of
Shehr Ara, to which he gave the name of Jehan
Ara, or, the ornament of the world, and ordered
that the river of Cabul should be brought, by a
Canal, through this new garden.

He now received intelligence of the death of
Aly Kuly Beg Sheer Afkun Khan, and of Kotebed-
deen Khan, of which event, the following is a
summary account. Aly Kuly Beg Atageelu, had
been employed as an Ambassador by Shah Ismail,
King of Persia, and upon the death of that monarch,
came into Hindostan, where, entering into the
service of the Khankhanan, during this expedition
in Tatah, he so distinguished himself by his valour
and good conduct, that he was rewarded with a
considerable munseb, and afterwards married the
daughter of Ghias Beg. When Akber marched

1 a.e. the Viziership R.B. 1., 103. The Amir-ul-Amara was euffering
from a severely incapacitatin itiness, This Asaf Khan is Qawa-mu-d-din Jafar
Beg. He bad been made Mir hi by Akbar in 989 A,H, (1581) R. B, I., 106

4p. HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

into the Dekhan, and sent Jehangir, then Sultan
Sileem, against the Ranna of Oudypoor, Aly Kuly
Beg was left under his command, and behaved so
much to his satisfaction, that he then gave him the
title of Sheer Afkun, or the “lion’s overthrower ;”
and when he came to the throne, sent him into
Bengal with a considerable command. Afterwards,
having become restless and refractory, the Emperur
told Kotebeddeen, when he was_ appointed
Subahdar of Bengal, to endeavour to reclaim Sheer
Afkun by kind treatment, but if that failed, to
order him to court, and in case of disobedience, to
punish him according to his deserts. Kotebeddeen
Khan began with friendly advice and gentle ad-
monition, but without effect, not being even able to
prevail upon him to come to an interview; which
having reported to Jehangir, he commanded him to
proceed to severity. On receipt of this order,
Kotebeddeen set out, slightly attended, to Burd-
wan, where the Jageer of Sheer Afkun was situ-
ated, and he hearing that the Subahdar was coming
almost alone, met him with only two servants ; but
Kotebeddeen had placed anumber of men in
ambush, who rushed out and surrounded Sheer
Afkun. Upon this, he drew his sword, and ripped
up the belly of Kotebeddeen, when Iybek Khan,
who was along with the Subahdar, wounded Sheer
Afkun in the head, who nevertheless, deprived
Iybek Khan of his life at one stroke. Sheer Afkun
was now beset by the whole party, and cut to
pieces ; Kotebeddeen expired a few hours after.
The Emperor was greatly afflicted at the death of

JEHANGIR 41

Kotebeddeen, who, as has been already observed,
was his foster brother. Jehangir Kuly Khan,
Subahdar of Bahar, was appointed Subahdar of
Bengal upon the death of Kotebeddeen, and Islam
Khan was sent from Agra to Patna, to take charge
of that Subah.

The Emperor, whilst he was at Cabul, sent for
Sultan Khusru, and ordering his fetters to be
taken off, permitted him to walk in the garden of
Shere Ara, and seemed every way disposed to
receive him again into favour.?. But on his return
to Lahoor, when he arrived at Soorkhab, it was
discovered that Khusru had kept up a correspond-
ence with some conspirators, who had resolved to
assassinate the Emperor when he was hunting.
The plot was discovered by the confession of one
of the conspirators, to Khojeh Wiess, Sultan
Khorum’s Dewan; and a numerous list of his
associates was also delivered in. Asof Khan
represented to the Emperor that the exercising of
violent measures might excite such commotions,
as it would be difficult to quell upon a march; and,
moreover to prevent further bloodshed, advised
him not to be curious in examining the list, but
rather to destroy it. This advice appeared so
prudent, that only three persons were put to
death; after which no further inquisition was
made into the affair.®

aR, B, I. 113-15,

9 R, B, I. 111, 122-3; Iqbal 27, 28, 29, 30; Du Jarric Ch. XVIII, 160-1,

® R, B, 122-3; Du Jarric Chap. XVII, 160-1; Maasir I. 282-3; Iqbal 27-30
Khusru was probably blinded then. For its nature and effects see E.D. Vv.
448, 449, 452; Hawkins Voyages p. 428; Finch in ParchasIV, 51; Della aa
(Travels) - 56; Tavernier 1, 334-5.

6

r\ HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

. Hashem Khan was now promoted to the rank
of five thousand, and appointed Subahdar of Orissa.
Whilst the army was encamped at Lahoor,
Asof Khan made a magnificent entertainment,
which his Majesty honoured with his presence.
Asof Khan’s presents in jewels, stuffs, and
elephants were valued atten lakhs of rupees, a
small part of which was accepted.!

Mortiza Khan sent the Emperor, from Gujerat,
two rubies, valued at twenty-five thousand rupees
each; one was considered as a great curiosity,
being an entire ring made out of one stone.

The Shereef of Mecca sent to Jehangir an
ambassador, with a complimental letter, and a
present of one of the curtains of the holy temple.
The ambassador received a present of seven
thousand rupees, and a lakh of rupees was ordered
to be expended in the most curious productions of
Hindostan to be sent to the Shereef.®

The insurrections in Gujerat and the Dekhan
being still unquelled, the Emperor resolved to
return to Agra. He marched to Delhy, where he
remained four days at Sileemgurh, and celebrated
the festival of the new year, at the village of
Rungteh,’ four cose from Delhy.

A. H. 1017—A. D. 1607.

Rajah Mansingh after repeated orders met the
Emperor near Agra, and brought him one hundred
elephants, but all unserviceable. Notwithstanding

2 R.B, I. 132.

9 'R, B.1. 133,

_«¥.R. B.3, 139 says itis 5 Kos. from Agra. The Agra volume of the
Imp, Gazett. (p. 764) spells it as Runkutta,

a


JRHANGIR 43
Jehangir was possessed of the fullest proofs 6f his
perfidy, and knew that Khusru had been guided
entirely by his evil counsel ;' yet, in consideration
of his powerful interest with the Rajahs of Hindos-
tan, it was judged best to give him a favourable
reception.

At Agra, Nersingh Deo presented the Emperor
with a white leopard, of which colour no one had
ever before been seen. The ground of the skin was
a dirty white and the spots were grey.” Jehangir,
in his memoirs, observes, that he had seen an
antelope, a hawk, a sparrow, a crow, a patridge, a
quail, and a peacock, that were white, but had
never before even heard of a white leopard.*

About. this time, Jehangir married the
daugnter of Kaim Khan Arab, one of the principal
nobles of the late Emperor, and who had taught
Jehangir the use of the bow. This Begum shortly
after obtained the title of Padshah Mahl, or
monarch of the seraglio.

Intelligence being received from Bengal, of the
death of Jehangir Kuly Khan the Subahdar, Islam
Khan was appointed to succeed him, and Sheikh
Afzul Khan, son of Sheikh Abulfazel, succeeded
Islam Khan in the government of Bahar.’

The Ranna having again revolted, Mehabut
Khan marched against him with twelve thousand

F a i. ve "Ite spots were of blue coloar and the whiteness of the
body was also inclined to bluishness,’

* Governor Hastings sent from Bengal a black leopard which was
presented to His Majesty, the King of England, and is now in the Tower of
London: the spots are ofa deeper black than the prevailing colour of the

skin.

PY HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

cavalry, two thousand Berkundaze infantry, sixty
elephants, eighty pieces of cannon and gujnals*
and a supply of twenty lakhs of rupees.'

The Khankhanan, upon his return from
Burhanpoor, presented peishkush of rubies,
emeralds, and pearls with ninety elephants,
altogether estimated at three lakhs of rupees,
besides other articles of considerable value.

About this time Kishen Singh? gained a victory
over the Ranna, of whose army twenty persons of
distinction were killed and near three thousand
men taken prisoners.’

_ Jehangir, attended by all the nobility, went on
foot to the shrine of Akber, where he bestowed in
charity a considerable sum of money. He gave
orders forthe mausoleum to be re-built, upon a
magnificent plan ; and fifteen lakhs of rupees were
expended on these improvements.‘

At the death of Akber, affairs in the Dekhan
fell into great confusion ; many of the chiefs threw
off the yoke, and the imperial army not being able
to resist them any longer, the Khankhanan entered
into a written engagement with the Emperor, to
make a complete conquest of the Dekhan in the
course of two years, provided he was allowed a
reinforcement of twelve thousand cavalry, anda
supply of ten lakhs of rupees. These demands

being immediately complied with, he began his
* A gujnal is a small guo fixed on ths back of an elephant.
4. B. I. 145; Iqbal, p. 34; Khaf. I. 259.
§ Aa Officer under Mahabat Khan.
_* *R, B. 2.151; Tod. 1, 28
. ©R, BT. 192, Owing 10 the revolt of Khusra Jaba had hed to start
for Lahore and the architects bad built it after their own Fa

JHHANGIR 45

march to the Dekhan, on the 14th of Shaban, or
4th December, accompanied by Rajah Soorej
Singh.!

Repeated complaints having been made to his
Majesty, that the relations and dependants of
Mortiza Khan had variously oppressed the inhabi-
tants of Ahmedabad, he was ordered to court.
Azem Khan was appointed Subahdar of Gujerat,
but to remain with the Emperor and depute to that
government Jehangir Kuly Khan, his eldest son.
Mortiza Khan, on his return to court, was
pardoned; and shortly after obtained a consider-
able jageer.?

Mirza Berkhoordar, son of Mirza Abdulrah-
man, obtained the title of Khan Alum.’ His great
grandfather entered into the service of Timour and
his descendants were successively Omrahs of high
rank.

Mehabat Khan‘ not having made any progress
in the war against the Ranna, the command of the
army,in that quarter, was now conferred upon
Abdullah Khan.°

Sultan Jehandar, one of the illegitimate sons
of the Emperor, who had gone into Bengal with
Kotebeddeen Koka, having shwon some symptoms
of insanity,® was now sent to court. At the same
time Sultan Shiriar, his twin brother, came also to
Agra from Gujerat.

Khaf, I 259; R. B. I., 149, 153; M, J. p. 60.

R, B.1., 153.

R. B.1., 154.

R. B. I., 155-6.

¥or his life see Maasir I, 97-105.
Magub-i-madar-zad probably misaning a born idiot R,'B, 1, 15-6,

46 HistorY of J#HANGIR

_.The Khankhanan proving dilatory in his
operations, Sultan Purveiz was sent into the
Dekhan! with twenty lakhs of rupees, accompanied
by Jaffer Beg Asof Khan, in the capacity of
Ataleek.2 The prince’s jageer of Khandies and
Berar was increased by the addition of the fort of
Asseergarh. A short time after, a reinforcement
of seven thousand cavalry, which Khanjehan
Khan,? and other officers of rank and high renown,
were sent from Agra, and Rajah Nersingh Deo,
Shujahut Khan, and Rajah Birkirmajeet were
ordered to join them at Oujein with five thousand
more cavalry.

Abdullah Khan, soon after he obtained the
command, gained a considerable victory over the
Ranna,‘ and blockaded him in the narrow passes of
the mountains; for which service® he was promoted
to the rank of five thousand cavalry, with the title
of Firoze Jung Bahadre.

A calender presented to his Majesty a full-
grown tiger, which, having been trained froma
cub, was perfectly tame. He was let loose in the
plain of the Jerokha at Agra, near the river; and
afterwards fourteen or fifteen others were tamed
in like manner, and allowed to range at large in
the same place.

The Emperor now married the daughter of
Rajah Ramchund Bundeyleh.°

1 Where his Court at Burhanpur is described by Roe, PP. 70, 79.
9 RB, 1,, 156-7; M. J. p. 61; Iqbal, 36-7; Khaf, I. 260
® R, B. 1., 161; Iqbal, 3849,

4 RB. I. 251 over Karan the heir-a parent of the Rana,
4 According to the Tuzuk (R. B. 158) the promotion wat ou hs sproint-

=e RS. Tey 160,

JEHANGIR 47

About this time, he went ona hunting party
to the Pergunnah of Bary. On these excursions,
he was so careful that the ryots should not suffer
any injury, that he appointed proper officers to
protect the crops, and to ascertain the actual
damage sustained; which was always made good
to the sufferers.?

He now pardoned Abdulrahman who had been
so active in Khusru’s rebellion and survived the
severe punishment already described.?

Upon the Emperor’s return to Agra, Mocurreb
Khan, who was just arrived there from Surat,
presented him with some curious Europe plate,
and other valuable articles. At the same time,
the Khankhanan sent him the Yousef Zelikha of
Jami, copied by Moulla Meer Ali, beautifully
illuminated and valued at a thousand gold mohurs.®

A poor widow of Cambayit complained to
Jehangir that Mocurreb Khan, the Governor of
that place had forcibly taken away her daughter,
and that when she demanded the girl from him, he
pretended she was dead. The Emperor ordered the
matter to be investigated, and it being proved
upon the person who had been the agent in the
business, he was severely punished ;‘ and half of
Mocurreb Khan’s jageer was taken from him, and
transferred to the widow, for her maintenance.®

The perhunnah of Curreckpoor having been
conferred in jageer upon Afzul Khan, the Subahdar

2 R. B. I. 167-8.

4 Jahangir (R. B. I. 172) says the man was put to death.

5 Also he ‘reduced Mugarrab Khan’s mansab ) by one half and made an
allowance to the woman who had been thus injured ’.

a. HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

of Bahar, he set out to visit his new grant, and
left the city of Patna under the charge of Sheikh
Hassam Bannarassy, and Ghiass Zein Khan, with
only a small number of troops, as the country was
then ina state of perfect tranquility. But one
Koteb, a man of low extraction, thinking it a
favourable time for exciting an insurrection,
pretended that he was Sultan Khusru, escaped
from the prison, and with an artful tale and large
promises he deceived some and bribed many others
to join him.
A. H. 1019—A. D. 1610.

When he saw his party sufficiently strong, he
suddenly entered the fort of Patna, and Sheikh
Bannarassy, and Ghiasszein Khan, being totally
unprepared for resistance, made their escape out
of a window,' and getting into a boat, fled to
Currukpoor, which is about 60 cose distant. The
rebels found in the fort treasure to a considerable
amount; and their number increased daily. The
first intelligence brought to Afzul Khan was that
the prince had actually made his appearance; but
he was soon undeceived by authentic accounts,
and shortly after the fugitives joined him at
Currukpoor. Afzul Khan made all possible haste
to Patna. The impostor drew out his men on the
banks of the river Punpun, where a battle was
fought, in which Koteb and his party, after a faint
resistance, were totally routed. They fled to the
city of Patna but were so closely pursued by the
victors, as not to have time to shut ‘the gates after

2. B, 1, 174 ' by a wicket gate ',

JEHANGIR : 49

them. The impostor. and a few of his adherents,
possessed themselves of the house of Afzul Khan,
which they barricaded and defended resolutely for
some hours killing about thirty of the assailants
with arrows; but at length all his party being
destroyed, he delivered himself up to Afzul Khan,
who, in revenge for the dishonour which he had
done to his house, put him to death immediately?
and all those who had before been taken prisoners,
were ordered into close confinement. The
Emperor, enraged at the negligence and pusillani-
mity of Sheikh Bannarassy and Ghiasszein Khan,
had them brought to court. Their beards were
shaved, after which they were dressed in women’s
clothes, placed upon asses, and led about the city
of Agra.

The Khankhanan neglecting to lay in proper
supplies for the support of his numerous army,
and having led them to Balaghaut, found himself
exposed to famine: to avoid which, he concluded a
dishonourable peace, and marched to Burhanpoor,
after having lost the important fortress of Ahmed-
nagar, which had been conquered in the time of
Akber. The whole army being dissatisfied with
his conduct, a general complaint was sent against
him to the Emperor, in consequence whereof he
was re-called, and the command of the army con-
ferred upon Khanjehan Khan. The Emperor soon
after sent a reinforcement, along with Khan Azem,

with thirty lakhs of rupees for the payment of the
2 * On the same day" according to R. B. I. 175.
* R.B.I., M. 3-76 ; Iqbal, 42-4; M. J. 65 ; Hhat. I. 261.
2 RB, 1, 178-80; 1qbel, 38-9 ; Khaf. I, 261-

St

—e HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

troops, and four lakhs of rupees to defray his own
expenses. The Khankhanan on his arrival at
court, met with a very cool reception; but a short
time after, his son [rej obtained the title of
Shanowaz Khan.’

A. H. 1020—A. D. 1611.

In the beginning of this year, arrived at Agra,
Yeadgar Aly Sultan, ambassador from Shah
Abbas, king of Persia. He brought from his
Majesty, a letter containing warm professions of
friendship, and several Iraky horses, with other
valuable presents. Upon delivering the letter, a
present of thirty thousand rupees was ordered
him from the treasury.’

About this time were celebrated the nuptials
of Sultan Khorum, with the daughter of Mozuffer
Hussain Mirza Seffevee.‘

A dangerous insurrection now broke out at
Cabul, headed by Ahdad an Afghan, who, with his
party, attempted to take that city by surprise; but
were repulsed by the garrison, and the inhabitants,
with great slaughter.. The Emperor thinking that
Khandowran, and the other officers stationed at
Lahoor, were remiss in their efforts against the
Afghans, ordered upon this service, Keleetch
Khan, and appointed him Subahdar of Cabul. The
Subahdary of Penjab was conferred upon Mortiza
Khan; but he was permitted to conduct the

3 R. B. I, 183-84,

4k. B, I. 180.
* RK. B, 1, 197-8, 263, 311-312; Price, 164-5.

SRHANGIR $1.

business through agents and continue himself at
Court.

The Khankhanan, soon after being re-called
from the Dekhan, obtained in jageer the sircars of
Culpee and Kenoje, in Agra’; and was sent to
preserve peace in that quarter.

The most remarkable event of this reign is the
marriage’ of the Emperor with Mehr-ul-Nessa,
Begum, the daughter of Etemadeddowlah, and
widow of Sheer Afkun.2 Upon the death of her
husband, the relations of the late Kotebeddeen sent
her to court; and the Emperor, in his affliction for
the loss of his friend, committed her to the charge
of Rokiah Sultana, Begum, one of Akber’s widows,
with whom she lived, unnoticed by the Emperor,
till the present festival of the new year,‘ when
seeing her by accident, he was so captivated by her
extraordinary beauty, that he married her im-
mediately. He then gave her the title of Nour
Mahl*, and some years after,® that of Nourjehant
Begum{. Her father, Etemadeddowlah,’ was raised
to the Vekalut; and Abulhassan, her eldest brother,
obtained the title of Etekad Khan,* with the office
of Khansaman.§ Her power over the Emperor

soon became absolute, and all affairs of the state

1 R, B.T., 199.
2 Not mentioned in the Tuzuk
8 Iqbal, 55 E. D. VI, 404; Kha. I, 265-6; Maasir, I, 130; II1, 622-5.
# Hadi E. D. 397-8.
5 Four years and a few cays after the death of Sher Afkan, Price, p. 46-7.
* The light of the Seraglio.
* ¢¢., in the 11th year s.¢., in 1616, R. B, I. 319; Iqbal, 56; Della Valle,
1, 53-4, Peter Mundy II, 205 “6.
+ The Light of the World.
Princess.
R. B. 1, 22,200.
* R. B. I. 202.
§ Steward of the household,

a HISTORY OF #HHANGIR

were committed to her management. ! She sat
behind a Chegh* at the window of the Jarokha,
whilst many of the nobility paid her the compli-
ment of the Khoornish and Tesleem. Her name
was inscribed upon the coin, and excepting that
she was not prayed for in the Khotbah, she was, in
every respect, the absolute monarch of the empire.
The following is the inscription upon her coin:

“AT THE COMMAND OF THE EMPEROR,
JEHANGIR, THE COIN HAS OBTAINED AN
HUNDRED ORNAMENTS; FROM THE NAME
OF NOURJEHAN PADSHAH BEGUM”.

Abdullah Khan pursued his victory over the
Ranna, who fled into the mountains. Abdullah
Khan was rewarded with the Subahdary of
Gujerat ; where he was ordered to raise forces, and
proceed to the Dekhan for which purpose he
received a supply of four lakhs of rupees. Rajah
Bassoo was sent to pursue the military operations
against the Ranna.’

The Emperor went on a hunting party to
Summergurh, near Agra. The nets were spread
according to custom, and the pavilions of the
Harem pitched within the enclosure. In the course
of a week nine hundred and seventy deer were
taken. Two hundred and forty-one were ordered
to be sent to Futtehpoor, and let loose upon the
plains of Chowgong; and about a hundred had

. © Roe, 325.

*a skreen or fine lattice, through which a person may look without being
discovered

® R. BI. 200,

IRHANGIR , 53

silver rings put in their noses, after which they
were set at liberty. The rest that were killed or
wounded, were distributed amongst the Omrahs
and Munsebdars.

A. H. 1021—A. D. 1612.

The method of making atyr of roses, was now
first discovered by the mother of Nourjehan
Begum. The atyris the essential oil of roses, a
very small proportion of which floats upon the sur-
face of distilled rose water, whilst it is warm, and
is collected by means of a piece of cotton fastened
upon a stick. It is the most delicate perfume that
is known, being as exquisite as the scent of a new
blown rose. The Emperor presented the invent-
ress with a string of valuable pearls; and Selima
Sultana Begum, one of Akber’s widows, named this

essence ATVR JEHANGIRY or THE ESSENCE
OF JEHANGIR.’

One of the most remarkable events of this
year, was the defeat of the Afghans, in Bengal,
and the death of their leader Osman. Bengal
measures from Chittagong to Ghurry, four hundred
and fifty cose in longitude, and from the northern
mountains to sircar Maduran, is two hundred cose
in latitude. The revenue at this time was estima-
ted at sixty crore of dams or sicca rupees 1,50,00,000.
The military establishment,.in the time of Akber,
consisted of twenty thousand cavalry, one hundred

* R. B. 1, 270-1.
® R, B, 1. 207-15,

| HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

thousand infantry, two thousand elephants,' four
or five thousand armed boats and a train of
artillery. Atthe death of Shere Khan, his son
Sileem Khan, possessed himself of all Bengal; and
was succeeded therein by Soliman Gernnee.
Akber’s army drove out the Afghans from the
interior parts: but some of them settled on the
boundaries, especially about the Dacca districts,
where they fortified themselves. At the head of
these was Osman Afghan, who gained several
advantages over the forces of Akber, and parti-
cularly during the government of Rajah Mansingh,
who, despairing of subduing him, at length suffered
him to remain unmolsted. But, Islam Khan, the
present Subahdar, sent Shujahut Khan with a
large army against him. An obstinate battle was
fought in which Shujahut Khan was thrown from
his elephant, but recovered himself; Osman was
slain and all his adherents submitted to the con-
queror. The Emperor rewarded Shujahut Khan
by an increase of munseb, with the additional title
of Rustam Zemanee. Islam Khan removed the
seat of his Government to Dacca, and gave to his
new city the name of Jehangirabad, or the City of
Jehangir.

About this time, Mocurreb Khan was sent to
conclude a treaty with the Portuguese Viceroy at
Goa. After transacting that business, he returned
with all the curiosities he could procure; and
which he bought at whatever price the Portuguese

: thought proper to demand. J ehangir mentions, in
1 1,000 according to the Turek, R. B. I. 207,

JEHANGIR . 55

his Toozek, that Mocurreb Khan brought from:Goa
several curious birds and beasts, and, amongst
them, describes a turkey cock, as a bird that he
had never before seen.!

The Emperor, tired with the lingering opera-
tions in the Dekhan, formed a plan for terminating
the war at one blow.* Abdullah Khan was ordered
to march his army from Gujerat, through the
passes of Nassick Terbunek, whilst Khanjehan
Khan proceeded by the way of Berar. Had they
properly concerted their measures, their united
forces must infallibly have reduced the enemy to
such straights, as would have compelled them to
conclude a peace on the most advantageous terms
for the Emperor. But, unfortunately, the two
generals envied and hated each other, and sooner
than act in concert, suffered the whole plan to
prove abortive. Abdullah Khan, flattering himself
that his army alone was sufficiently strong for en-
suring the conquest, was unwilling to allow Khan-
jehan Khan any share in the glory that would have
attended the conclusion of the war. He, therefore,
marched hastily from Gujerat, without giving the
other any advice of his motions, and entered the
passes Nassick Terbunek, where the Bargees
harassed him with skirmishes by day, and at
night infested the camp with rockets and other
fireworks, in the discharge of which they possessed
singular skill. Khanjehan Khan and Rajah Man-
singh, received intelligence of the situation, but

1 R, B, I, 215.
2 R, B, I. 155.

-.) HISTORY. OF JEHANGIR

were so dilatory in marching to his relief, that he
was obliged to lead back his army to Ahmedabad,
by the way of Dowletabad, whilst the enemy hung
upon his rear, and infested his march to the very
borders of Baglana. When Khanjehan Khan and
Rajah Mansingh heard of his retreat, having
thereby gained their ends, they marched back to
Adilabad, and joined the army under the command
of Sultan Purveiz.! Upon this ill success his
Majesty was persuaded to send the Khankhanan
again into the Dekhan, hoping at last to derive
benefit from his experience. He was accordingly
recalled from Kinoje and ordered to the Dekhan,
along with his sons Shahnowaz Khan and Darab
Khan:

Soon after the above mentioned ill success in
the Dekhan, Asof Khan died of a chronic disorder,
at Burhanpoor, in the sixtieth year of his age.
Besides the advantages of a graceful and beautiful
person, he was endowed with profound judgment,
uncommon eloquence, and ready wit, was an
elegant prose writer, and possessed considerable
poetical talents.2 Also, about the same time, died,
in his Governmént at Kandahar, Mirza Ghazi, a
gallant soldier, and a faithful subject ; but unfortu-
nately addicted to drinking to which vice he fell a
victim.‘

‘Sultan Khorum now married the daughter of
Etekad Khan, the eldest brother of Nourjehan
a R, B. 1. 219-21 ; Iqbal, 65-6 ; Khaf, I. 273-6, *.
-3,

avew
Ppt
DW bi ost
Stet ee
aoe

2

JEHANGIR . 57

Begum. The nuptials were celebrated with un-
common magnificence and splendour, at the palace
of Etemadeddowlah, the bride’s grandfather; and
his Majesty honoured the ceremony with his
presence.!

Shujahut Khan had been ordered to Orissa by
Islam Khan, and as he was travelling on an
elephant, at night, happened to pass by another of
these animals picketted near the road, and
who being frightened at the sound of the horses
feet, attempted to break his chains. The attend-
ants called out to apprize Shujahut Khan of his
danger, who, waking suddenly, threw himself on
the ground, and happening to alight upon his hands
amongst some rubbish, broke some of his fingers,
and being of a bad habit of body, this accident
occasioned his death a few days after.®

Motaked Khan, late Dewan of Bengal, now
arrived at court, and Islam Khan took that
opportunity of sending to the Emperor, the sons
and other relations of the deceased Osman Khan
Afghan. They presented their peishkush which
was graciously received. Motaked Khan was at
this time appointed Meer Bukhshee; and Zuffer
Khan obtained the Subahdary of Bahar.

After much felicitation, Khan Azem was
appointed to command the army employed against
the Ranna; and now set out for Malwah, where

1 R. B. I. 224 and note,
*R. B, I. 226-7.
®R, B, 1, 230.

8

$8 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

his jageer was situated, to make the necessary
preparations for prosecuting the war.!
A. H. 1022—A. D. 1613.

Housheng, son of Islam Khan, arrived at court,
and brought with him some of the people ‘called
Mughs, who had lately been taken prisoners, They
inhabit the islands of Bengal, and are mere brutes in
human form. They eat all kinds of animals, nothing
being to them unclean. They marry their sisters 3,
that are by another mother. Their features bear a
great resemblance to the Calmuc Tartars; but
their language has no mixture of Turkish, being
.very familiar to that used in Tibet. They pro-
fess no religion, nor have any faith in their
dealings.

Afzul Khan, son of the great Abulfazel, who
had come from his government of Bahar to pay
his respects to the Emperor, died at Agra of boils
which had turned into incurable ulcers.®

The hall of public audience is separated by
two balustrades :—within the first rail, none but
persons of high rank are admitted; all other ser-
vents of the crown are allowed to pass the second
rail; and the multitude stand without side. For-
merly both rails were of wood; but now the inner
one was ordered to be made of silver as well as ‘the
stairs to ascend from thence to the Jerokha; and
two. wooden elephants, one on each side of the
Jerokha, were taken down, and in their stead were

2. B. 1, 234 Price 220-2,
_, 9 R, B, 1, 236,
3R. BI, 241,

JEHANGIR 59.

placed two of silver, weighing one hundred’ and
twenty-five maunds, in value about four lakhs of
rupees.'

A hot pestilential blast of wind at Bahmena-
bad (Amanabad) twelve cose from Lahoor, killed
nine men whowere standing under a tree; the
birds fell lifeless from its branches; and many
beasts were found dead in the neighbouring fields.*

The Emperor now undertook a journey to
Ajmeer,? for the purpose of visiting the shrine of
Khojeh Moyeneddeen Chiesty, as well as to have
a nearer control over the operations in the Dek-
han, and against the Ranna. When he came in
sight of the shrine, at the distance of about ten
miles, he alighted from his horse, and walked to
the tomb, where he performed his devotions, and
distributed large sums in charity.‘

He at this time received intelligence, that
the Portuguese at Goa, regardless of the treaty
lately concluded, had seized some merchantships
near the port of Surat, and made ‘several Musal-
mans prisoners. Mocurreb Khan, in whose
Government Surat was situated, was ordered to
make a particular investigation of their conduct.

The Emperor now sent Sultan Khorum to
command against the Ranna, and although this
procedure was at the particular request of Khan
Azem, yet when it came to the point, he was

IR, B. I. 242,

9R. B. I, 247-48.

8 Said to have been suggested by Khan Azam,
¢R. B, I, 253-54,

#R. B, I, 2355,

60 : HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

jealous of the Prince’s authority, and behaved
with such disrespect, that he was ordered to court
and from thence sent prisoner to Gualiar. Shortly
after, he was restored to liberty, in consequence
of Jehangir seeing in a dream the late Emperor, who
intreated for his pardon. He then obtained a
Tunkha equivalent to the maintenance of five
thousand cavalry, and his son Jehangir Kuly
Khan, with his other relations, were permitted to
go to Allahabad, where their jageer was situated.’

Islam Khan having died suddenly in Bengal,
his brother, Gossim Khan was appointed his
successor in that Government.’

Whilst the Emperor was at Ajmeer, a brass
kettle was made, measuring ten yards in height,
and ten yards in diameter, andin it was dressed
victuals for five thousand persons, which was
distributed at the tomb of Moyeneddeen Chiesty.

At the intercession of his mother and sisters,
Sultan Khusru was now set at liberty, and permit-
ted to come to court asformerly. But as he did not
seem satisfied, or even sensible of the indulgence,
he was shortly after again banished from his
father’s presence.®

A. H. 1023—A. D. 1613.

Etekad Khan, son of Etemadeddowlah, now
obtained the title of Asof Khan;‘and Ibrahim
Khan, the maternal uncle of the Empress Nour

© RB, 1. 257-8, 261, 269, 287, 289.
- 9R,B, 1, 297,
‘SR. BL 252, 261,

JRHANGIR 64

Mahal, was appointed second Bukhshee of the
household.

A princess was born to Sultan Khorum, by the
daughter of Asof Khan, whom the Emperor
named Jehan Ara Begum.

About this time Ahdad and his rebellious
Afghans were defeated at Kabul by Mohamed Khan,
who madea pyramid of five hundred! of their heads.
He was rewarded with the title of Lushker Khan.’

Rajah Mansingh now died in the Dekhan ;
upon which his son Behow Singh was ordered to
court, and onhis arrival, the Emperor confirmed
him in all his late father’s possessions, with the
title of Mirza Rajah.®

At the pass of Hasez Jemal, in the neighbour-
hood of Ajmeer, is a delightful spring of water,
near to which Jehangir ordered a magnificent
palace tobe erected. A stone basin forty yards
square, was made to receive the water, of this
spring through artificial fountains that spouted to
the height of twelve yards. To this place he gave
the name of Cheshmeh Nour, or the fountain of
light.‘

When Sultan Khorum arrived at Oudypoor,
the Ranna’s capital, he detached bodies of troops
into all parts of the country, andso completely
hemmed him up in the mountains, that all supplies

1600 heads according to the Tuzuk R. B. I, 264.

®2R, B, I. 263-4. According to price (p. 94) the prisoners were brough
before Jahangir with the decapitated heads of 17,000 suspended from their
ne e .

® R. B. I, 266, Theclan of Mabasingh, son of Jagat Singh. Man Singh
bis eldest son who had predeceased his father was thus overlooked,

*R, BI. 269-70,

62 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

were cut off; a malignant disorder raged amongst
the troops from a stagnated air, and desertions
became very frequent. Thus reduced to extre-
mities, the Ranna deputed to the Prince, Soob
Kurren and Hirdoss Jehlah, two of his principal
servants, to intreat that confidential persons might
be sent to assure him of honourable terms, upon
his making due submission to the Emperor. The
prince sent to him Mirza Shukerullah, his Dewan,
and Soonder Doss, his Meer Saman, to promise a
favourable reception. When he returned with
them and approached the camp, the Prince did him
further honour, by sending Abdullah Khan, Rajah
Soorej Mull, Rajah Nersingh Deo, and other offi-
cers of rank to meet him.
A few days after, the Prince gave a grand
entertainment at Gowkundeh, when Ranna Amer
Singh was ordered to be introduced. At his en-
trance, from the place whence he first discovered
the Prince seated on a throne, at every step as he
advanced he made the Tesleem: and when he
reached the throne, prostrated himself with his
forehead upon the ground. The Prince, laying
hold of both his hands, lifted him up and embraced
him. When these ceremonies were ended Abdullah
Khan, and Soorej Singh, were ordered to seat them-
selves on the right, and the Ranna on the left side
of the throne. The Prince entered into familiar
conversation with the Ranna, and filled him with
joy and confidence. He presented the Prince with
aruby avaluable family jewel. The Rana was
honoured with a’ magnificent khelut, a sword and

JEHANGIR 63
Khenjer inlaid with precious stones, a horse and
an elephant, both richly caparisoned; and all his
suite received dresses suitable to their respective
ranks. When the Ranna took his leave, Mirza
Shukerullah Khan, and Soonder Doss, were ordered
to escort to court his son Kurren, and they return-
ed with him in the afternoon. He met witha most
gracious reception, and received khelut and other
presents; and it being agreed that he should
accompany the Prince to the Emperor, fifty thou-
sand rupees were issued from the treasury to
defray the expenses of his journey.

Sultan Khorum gained great renown by this
victory, the Ranna of Oudypoor having never
before been subdued by the Kings of Delhi nor by
any Emperor of the house of Timour. Akber had
an army constantly employed against him, but was
never able to gain any considerable advantage.

A. H. 1014—A. D. 1615.

As soonas Sultan Khorum had settled affairs
with the Ranna? he set out for, Ajmeer with Ran-
na’sson Kurren.2. When Sultan Khorum encamped
within sight of Ajmeer, he was met by the prime
minister and all the principal nobility. The royal
palace was decorated in the most magnificent
manner for his reception, and a grand entertain-
ment prepared on the occasion.

In the morning, Sultan Khorum entered the
city of Ajmeer on horse-back, attended by all the

1R, B. I, 273-6 Iebal, 77 Khaf. 279.

The Rata feeling himself humiliated by the defeat and disgrace of
surrender abdicated in favour of Karan-Tod I, 29

*R. B, 1, 276, Khaf 1, 279.

[a HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

great officers of State, and the Munsebdars with
their troops... About two o’clock he waited upon
the Emperor. After the Prince had paid the usual
compliments‘of the Koornish, Tesleem and Zemeen-
bose, his Majesty arose from the throne, and folded
him in his arms, with every demonstration of
paternal joy and affection. His nuzzer was a
thousand mohurs, anda thousand rupees, and a
thousand mohurs in Tesedduk*, together with a
crystal basket’ full of Jewels, and the ruby which
had been given him by the Ranna, valued at fifty
thousand rupees.? He received a khelut, richly
ornamented with pearls, a horse and an elephant
richly caparisoned: and the Dewan Azem was
ordered to prepare for him tunkhas equivalent to
twenty thousand zat and ten thousand cavalry.
Kurren‘ then made his submissions, after which he
was permitted to stand on the left side of the
Jarokha. Kurren was honoured with a rich dress,
and all the Omrahs who had served under the
Prince were distinguished with marks of the royal
favour, according to their merits. All the lands
conquered from the Ranna, during the last sixty
years, all of which had been granted in jageer, were
restored to him, upon his becoming tributary to
the Emperor.

‘About this time the Portuguese Viceroy
attempted to seize the castle of Surat but was

UR, BI, 277-8.

* Or to be distributed in charity.

#* Qf Frank work ' R. B. I. 286.

® Sixty thousand rupees according to the Tosak, R. B, I. 285,
| # Roe 127,

JEHANGIR : &

repulsed by the English, who resided there under
the Emperor's protection. The English, with their
fireworks, burnt several of the ships belonging to
the Portuguese, and gave them so warm a recep-
tion, that finding themselves unequal to the
enterprise, they were glad to retreat. They then
sent a person to Mocurreb Khan, the Governor of
Surat, pretending that having gone to conclude
treaty, the English commenced this unprovoked
hostility. This account is taken from Jehangir's
Memoirs.

At the recommendation of Sultan Khorum,
Mirza Shukerullah obtained the title of Afzul
Khan, and Soonder Doss that of Rajah Bicker-
majeet.®

Dyanet Khan,? without any provocation, having
behaved with great insolence to Etemadeddowlah,
his Majesty was so enraged thereat, that he order-
ed him to be sent prisoner to Gualiar; but a few
months after, at the intercession of Etemadeddow-
lah, he was released from his confinement.‘

From the commencement of his reign, the
Emperor had ordered that on every Friday night,
all necessitous persons should be brought to him ;
and he relieved their wants with money, grants of
land etc. From the accounts kept by the officers
of Government it appeared, he had this year bestow-
ed as follows: in money fifty thousand rupees; of

land fourteen whole villages, and one lakh ninety
2 R. B, 1. 274-5, ;
2 R, B, I. 402.
® Sabit Khaz according to R. B, 1. 278.

66 , HISTORY OF. JEHANGIR

thousand beegahs ; twenty-six ploughs, and eleven
thousand kherwars* of rice.'

. ., During the celebration of the festival of the
new year, the munseb of Etemadeddowlah was
increased to six thousand zat, and three thousand
eavalry, with the privilege to beat the nekareh**
at the residence of the court ; an honour which no
one, excepting the king’s sons, enjoyed.* At the
game time Kurren was appointed a Munsebdar of
five thousand zat and five thousand cavalry.2 He
was the first of his family who had ever entered
into the service, or acknowledged obedience to any
foreign power.

On the 29th of Seffer, or 19th March, Sultan
Dara Shekuuh, was born to Sultan Khorum by the
daughter of Asof Khan.‘

-’ Mustefa Beg, ambassador from Shah Abbass,
arrived at Ajmeer, to announce to the Emperor
his conquest of Gurjestan or Georgia. He brought
many valuable presents, amongst which were
horses, mules, Aleppo cloths, and nine Europe dogs
trained for hunting.

Mehabut Khan made his Majesty very con-
siderable presents, amongst which was a kepauh*
inlaid with precious stones valued at a lakh of

-. © The kherwar is about three maunds,

2 R. B, 1, 279.
- ** A drum, beaten only by persons of high rank.
‘® R. B. 1. 280-1.
3 R, B. 1. 281,
* R, B. I, 282-3.
* A long aword.

JEHANGIR 67

rupees; and other articles which were moreover
estimated at one lakh thirty-eight thousand rupees.!

Ibrahim Khan was now appointed Soobahdar
of Bahar, in the room of Zuffer Khan, recalled.

In the beginning of this year, Kurren obtained
permission to return to his father. During his
residence at court, he received from the Emperor
in money and jewels, to the amount of ten’? lakhs
of rupees, with one hundred and ten horses and
five elephants. And the present which were
conferred upon him by Sultan Khorum were also
of great value**. A short time after the departure
of Kurren, his son, Jugget Singh arrived at court,
and was graciously received.

When Sultan Khorum entered the twenty-
fourth year of his age, the Emperor made a grand
entertainment on the occasion. The Prince having
never yet tasted wine, Jehangir filled a glass,
which he put into his hand, and told him he ought
to follow the example of his ancestors by drinking
the juice of the grape; but however advised him to
use it with moderation, quoting the following lines
from Abu Aly Sina*.

“Wine is the enemy of the ignorant, and the
friend of the wise:
A small quantity is teriac**, when drunk
to excess, it is a poisonous snake:
2 R, BT. 284,
2 Two lakhs according to the Tuzuk ; R. B. I, 293.
** This account, which is taken from Jehangit's Memoirs, is probably
exaggerated,

* Vulgarly called, by European authors, Avicenna,
** An antidote,

: HISTORY OF. JEHANGIR

An intemperate use thereof is destructive;
‘But taken in moderation, it proves bene-
- ficial to the constitution ” .?

Near the end of this year, Shanowaz Khan,
son of the Khankhanan gained some advantage
over Amber, the general, and prime-minister of
Nizam-ul-mulk.

The most remarkable event of this year, was
the conquest of Gookerah*** dependant upon
Bahar. Diamonds are obtained from one of its
rivers after the following manner: During the
dry season, the river discovers great part of its
bed, in which are small cavities, where the water
still remains ; and such of them as harbour swarms
of gnats, contain diamonds. The people throw out
the water, and by digging down about a yard and a
half, find amongst the gravel and sand, diamonds
of different sizes, some single stones worth a lakh
of rupees, and others very small. This bed of the
river which produces diamonds, is in the zemin-
dary of Dirjen Sal. No former Soobahdar of
Bahar had ever been able to penetrate into his
country, on account of the thickness of the
jungles, and the unhealthiness of the air; and,
therefore, after making some fruitless attempts,
were contented to allow him to remain in peace,
in return for a tribute of a few valuable stones.
But Ibrahim Khan, the new Soobahdar, suddenly
marched into his country with a large force, and

before the Rajah could assemble his troops, took.
9 R, B. 1. 306.
oo at is now generally written Goorkah.

JEHANGIRZ: 69

him prisoner, and annexed his zemindary to the
empire. For this eminent service his munseb was
raised to four thousand zat and five thousand
cavalry, which the title of Futteh Jung* and adl his
officers were largely rewarded.!

The festival of the new year was celebrated at
Ajmeer with great magnificence. Mehr-ul-Nissa,
who on her marriage with the Emperor was styled
Nour Mahl**, now obtained the title of Nurjehan***
Begum.” Amongst the presents made to the
Emperor, during the festival was a khenjer, valued
at fifty thousand rupees, from Meer Jemaleddeen
Hussein Anjew.

During these holidays, the Emperor honoured
Asof Khan with a visit, on which occasion, the
road was covered with velvet and brocades that
cost ten thousand rupees.

He also went to the house of Etemadeddowlah,
who presented a nuzzer of great value, out of
which his Majesty accepted of jewels to the
amount of a lakh and twenty thousand rupees.
The munseb of this nobleman was now increased
to seven thousand zat, and five thousand cavalry
with a Teman Towgh* and permission to beat his
nekareh, immediately after that of Sultan Khorum.
_ About this time died Morteza Khan, whilst he
was besieging the fort of Kengerah, whither he

had been sent a few months before.
}* The victorious in war.
1, B, ¥. 315.
** The light of the seraglio.
*** The light of the world,
4 Roe, 125-6, 131, 132; R. B, I, 319.
* Wide Ayeen Akbery, Vol. 1, page 65,
8 R, B, I, 344.

: w. ss HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

-A- son was now born to Sultan Khorum, by
the: daughter of Asof Khan and the Emperor
narned’ him Shah Shujah.!

At Ajmeer the Emperor was weighed with the
usual ceremonies, on the solar and lunar anniver-
saries of his nativity.”

About this time arrived at Ajmeer Mohammed
Reza Beg, ambassador from Shah Abbass.

A. H. 1025—A. D. 1616.

Abed Khan Bukhshee and the Vakil Navees,
having represented from Ahmedabad, that Abdul-
lah Khan the Soobahdar, displeased with them for
writing to Court all the transactions of his Govern-
ment, had enraged a number of people to attack
and insult them on their way home; the Emperor
was so enraged thereat, that he ordered Dyanet
Khan.to go and bring him prisoner to Court. But
Abdullah Khan having received secret intelligence
of the Emperor’s intentions, set out from Ahmeda-
bad on foot, and meeting with Dyanet Khan in the
middle of the way, was with difficulty prevailed
upon to make use of a palkee, during the remainder
of the road to Court.2 When he arrived at Ajmeer,
Sultan Khorum interceded with the Emperor, and_
obtained his pardon.*

/'R BLL 328,
2 Roe, 221-2,
3 R. B, I, 331 ; For interesting details of the affair, see Roe, 242.
* Sir Thomas Roe, the ambassador from James the First of England te
Jehangit was then at Ajmeer, andin his journal are mentioned most of the
events of this year, which we have related from the Masr Jehangiry. The

reader will Gnd great amusement in reading Sir Thomas Roe's journal
‘pablished io Churchill's Collection of Voyages and Travels, Vol, I.

JEHANGIR , 71

1. By the command of the. Emperor, the shrine of
Moyeneddeen Chiesty was surrounded with a gold.
railing of pierced work, which cost one lakh and
twelve thousand rupees.'

Mocurreb Khan presented the Emperor with a
young Ethiopian Elephant. His ears were larger
than those of Hindostan, the proboscis and tail
somewhat longer. Some years before this, Etemad
Khan sent Akber a young Ethiopian Elephant,
which, when it was full grown, was active but very
vicious.?

The plague first appeared in Punjab, and from
thence spread to Lahore ; and after it had somewhat
abated in that quarter, broke out in the Duab and
Delhi, where it committed great devastation. This
disorder had never before been known in Hindos-
tan. The physicians attributed it to there having
been a great drought for two years together, which
they supposed had infected the air.®

Whilst the Emperor was at Ajmeer, he
received from the Dekhan marble statues of Ranna
Amer Singh, and his son Kurren which were
allowed to bear strong resemblance of the originals.
They were ordered to be carried to Agra, and
placed in the garden of the Jarokha Dursun.‘

Khusru was now taken out of the charge of
Annyroy Singhdelum and committed to the custody
of Asof Khan.:°

2 According to R, B. I. 329, 1,10,000 rupees.

2 R. BI. 323.

3 R. B. I. 330, Iqbal, 88-9.

af For certain considerations‘ R; B. 1, 336 ; Roe, 245, 246, 286.
8 R. BL I, 332. ;

%@ HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

«Muhammad Reza Beg, ambassador from Shah
Abbas, waited upon the Emperor at Ajmeer, and
presented to him a complimentary letter with
some valuable presents from the King of Persia.'

' Through the mismanagement of Sultan: Pur-
yeiz affairs in the Dekhan were declining daily;
the enemy having by degrees driven him out of all
the country from Ballaghaut to Ahmednagar.
Sultan Khorum’s great success against the Ranna,
determined the Emperor’ to give him the command
in the Dekhan, whilst he himself advanced as far
as Mendow. On this occasion, he bestowed upon
Khorum the title of Shah, or King, a dignity
hitherto confined to the Emperors of the house of
Timour.2 His munseb was increased to twenty
thousand zat and ten thousand cavalry, of two and
three horses*. At the time that these honours
were conferred, he received a splendid khelut,
embroidered with pearls, two horses and an
elephant, richly caparisoned, an inlaid khenjer and
sword with a belt for the latter valued at a lakh of
rupees. Several trays of jewels were also brought
to him; but he took only one string of pearls to
which his Majesty added another of great value
which he himself had worn.

On the 19th of Shewal, or 19th October,‘ Shah
Khorum took his leave of the Emperor, to march

to the Dekhan. Amongst other presents, the
_ © R, B, 1. 336-7; Iqbal, 89-90 ; Roe, 258-60.
2 Roe, 242-4, 256, 274.
2 R, BI, 338. .
: * Vide Ayean Akbery, Val. I, page 142.
.... § $4, Sth Aban, only the camp equipage of Khurram left on that day.
_ Mp fenve taking was on the 20th Aban ; R. B. 1. 337-8,

JEHANGIR 3.

Emperor gave him a coach, made after the English
fashion, and in which he hadjrode himself. _

On the 1st of Zilkadeh, or 30th October, the
Emperor set out from Ajmeer for Mendow, in his’
English coach,! drawn by four horses.* It is the
custom with the kings of Hindostan, when they
travel to the east to commence their journey on an
elephant ; towards the west, on a horse:of one
colour; towards the north, on a palkee, or singha-
sen;and towards the south ona carriage. From
the time of the Emperor’s arrival in Ajmeer to his
departure for Mendow, had elapsed three years
and five days.’

As the route of Shah Khorum lay through the
territory of the Ranna, he with his sons came to
meet the Prince at Anowleh. His peishkush
consisted ofa tray of jewels, five elephants, and
thirty-seven horses, out of which the Prince
accepted one elephant, and three horses. The
Ranna and his sons after being honoured with
kheluts, took their leave®; but his grandson, Jugget
Singh, was appointed to attend the Prince on his

expedition.

1 Roe, 90, 98, 284, 306; Terry, p, 385; For details of the departure see
Roe, 282-7.

* This is the coach which was given to him by Sir Thomas Roe. It is
\‘wy remarkable that neither Jehangir in his memoirs, nor any eastern
historian, has taken any notice of the English ambassador. This must have
proceeded from the mean appearance of the embassy ; and indeed, Sir Thomas
tells us as much in his letter tothe Company, dated Ajmeer, 25th January
1615. ‘ But after the English were come away, he, the Emperor asked the
Jesuit, whether the King of England was a great king, that sent presents of so
small value, and that he looked for some jewels, etc,"’ It is natural to suppose
that the Jesuit took advantage of this question to represent the English
monarch as a petty Prince of Europe.

aR. B.L 340.

3 R. B. I, 344-5.

10

.) on HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

Before Shah Khorum committed any hostilities
in the Dekhan, he sent Rajah Bickermajeet and
Adil Khan to Amber, with assurances, that upon
peaceably relinquishing all his conquests, he should
obtain full pardon; but that if he continued
refractory, he should be attacked by a force
sufficient to destroy him.

About this time, Jehangir conferred upon
Mustefa Khan and his children in Altumgha, the
pergunnah of Maldah in Bengal.’

A. H. 1026—A. D. 1617.

We must now return to the Dekhan. When
Shah Khorum crossed the Nerbudda he was met
by the Khankhanan, Khanjehan Khan, Mehabut
Khan and all the other principal munsebdars of the
army in the Dekhan. He entered Burhanpoor on
the 5th of Rubby-ul-Awwel, or 2nd March A. D.
1617, the same day that the Emperor entered the
fort of Mendow.’ At Burhanpoor, Afzul Khan, and
Rajah Bickermajeet, joined Shah Khorum, and
shortly after, Adil Khan arrived with a consider-
able peishkush for himself and the other chiefs of
the Dekhan. He formally delivered up all the
territory of Ballaghaut together with the fort of
Ahmednagar. Intelligence hereof was dispatched
to the Emperor, and Syed Abdulla Khan, the
messenger, carried with him the keys of Ahmed-
nagar. Abdullah Khan obtained the title of Seif

1R.B.I, 361.
_ , 2 R.B, 1. 368; For description of it see Terry, 181, 183, 184; Finch in
‘Purchas IV. 34-3; Iqbal, 90-7 ; Firishta, 209-280 ; Della Valle I, 97.

« Price, 198-9 ; Roa, 340, 385,

JEHANGIR 1%

Khan,' and the Emperor sent the Prince a ruby,
taken out of his own diadem. Adil Khan, at the.
recommendation of Shah Khorum, was honoured
with the title of Firzend orson,? The peishkush
which Adil Khan sent to his Majesty in money,
jewels, elephants, and horses, was estimated at.
fifteen lakhs of rupees; and he bestowed upon
Afzul Khan, and Rajah Bickermajeet, two lakhs of
rupees each. Rajah Bickermajeet laid out his two
lakhs of rupees at Goa, in the purchase of a ruby,
which he presented to Shah Khorum.

As soon as Shah Khorum had been every
article of the treaty fulfilled, he made preparations
for joining the Emperor. He left with the Khan-
khanan twenty thousand cavalry, and seven
thousand berkundaze infantry ; and the rest of his
army being twenty-five thousand cavalry,’ and two
thousand berkundaze infantry, accompanied him-
self to Mendow, where he arrived on the 10th of
Shawal,® or 30th September 1617.

After the ceremonies of koornish and tesleem,
the Emperor descended from the Jarokha, and with
his own hands, placed upon the head of Shah.
Khorum, a tray full of jewels, and another full of
gold. The Prince’s munseb was now increased to
thirty thousand, with the title of Shahjehan,’ or
the king of the world; andin the edict which.

pS R. B. I. 382; Iqbal, 99-101 ; Khaf. I. 2901,

3 Ibid,

® R, B, I, 387.

* 30,000 horses and 7,000 musketeer infantry; R. B. I. 393.
5 11th of Shawal according to R. B. I. 393.

®° R. B.t. 395,

iB HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

announced his new dignities, it was specified, that
he had. permission to be seated on a sundely, or
chair, in the royal presence.

\ A few days after his arrival at Court, Shah-
jehan exposed all his peishkush in the public hall
of audience. The Emperor astonished at their
magnificence and value, descended from the jarokha
to view them more distinctly. Amongst other
articles were the following: the ruby which Rajah
Bickermajeet bought at Goa for two lakhs of
rupees—it weighed seventeen miskals,? and the
Emperor had not one larger than twelve tanks;
an amethyst weighing twenty tanks, valued ata
lakh of rupees ; a diamond weighing thirty ruttees,
valued at forty thousand rupees ; another weighing
one tank and six ruttees, of the same price; and
another weighing one tank valued at thirty
thousand rupees; a pearl of sixty-four ruttees,
worth twenty-five thousand rupees, two pearls
weighing two miskals and eleven ruttees, valued at
the same price; one hundred and fifty elephants,
three of which had harness and chains of gold, and
nine of silver, together with a hundred horses.
Besides the above, were rich stuffs, fine linens and
other articles to an immense amount. The
Emperor accépted of as muchas was valued at
twenty lakhs of rupees; after which he directed
Shahjehan to present Nourjehan Begum, with two
lakhs’ of rupees; and to distribute sixty thousand
rupees amongst the other Begums.

“1 BR, B, I, 399-401 ; Iqbal, 105 ; Khaf, I. 294,
3 ,And 59 surkbs ; R. B, 1. 400,

JEHANGIR TM

Nourjehan Begum gave a grand entertainment
in honour of Shahjehan, when she bestowed upon
him a khelut, with some valuable jewels, two
horses and an elephant. She also made presents
to all his officers, who had distinguished them-
selves during the war. Her expenses on this
occasion amounted to three lakhs of rupees."

Ibrahim Khan, the Soobahdar of Bahar, sent
the Emperor nine diamonds obtained from the
territory of Goorkah, before described ; one weighed
fourteen and a half tanks, and was valued at
a lakh of rupees.’

Koteb-ul-Mulk, the Doonyadar or chief of
Golconda sent to court a peishkush of fifteen lakhs
of rupees, in jewels and other articles.

On the Khankhanan were conferred the
governments of Kandeis, Berar and Ahmednagar ;
and his son Shanowaz Khan was ordered to be
stationed at Ballaghaut with twelve thousand
cavalry!

A Princess was now born to Shahjehan, by the
daughter of Asof Khan and named Roshenrai
Begum.‘

Khandowran, on account of his infirmities, was
at his own request removed from the Soobahdary

Whilst Jehangir was Kr
delighted with Mohammef <

%% ©  —- HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

Singing,' that he was ordered to have his weight in

. silver, which’ was Bix thousand’ and three hundred
| rupees. "After which an elephant was bestowed,
upon him to carry home himself and the money. a

Tobacco, which but a few years before had
been brought into Hindostan by the Portuguese,
being thought prejudicial to the health of the
natives, the Emperor issued an edict prohibiting
the use of this plant throughout his dominions:
wherein he only followed the example of Shah
Abbas, who, on account of its pernicious effects,
had forbidden it throughout Persia, under the
severest penalties. **

Cossim Khan, Soobahdar of Bengal, being
remiss in transmitting his accounts to Court, the
Emperor recalled him, and removed Ibrahim Khan
from Bahar to Bengal; and Jehangir Kuly Khan
succeeded Ibrahim Khan.‘

' Mehabut Khan presented to the Emperor a
peishkush, in which was a ruby weighing eleven
miskals. When Jehangir was at Ajmeer, a Portu-
guesé merchant asked two lakhs of rupees for this
stone, whilst the jewellers valued it at eighty
thousand rupees. The same man afterwards
carried it to Burhanpoor, where Mehabut Khan
bought it for a lakh of rupees.

i Playing on the flute.

* R. BI, 376; Price, 199-201,

* The above account of the importation of tobacco into Hindostan, is
taken from Jebangir's memoirs ; who remarks also, that pine-apples were
brought ‘here by the Portuguese and first planted in the royal gardens at Agra,
in the commencenrent of his reign.

3 RB. 1 370-1.

-*RB.B 1. 373,

JEHANGIR ry

Upon a hunting party Nourjehan Begum’ killed
four tigers with a matchlock, from her elephant.
The Emperor was so delighted at her skill, that he
made her a present of a pair of emerald bracelets,
valued at a lakh of rupees, and bestowed in charity
a thousand mohurs.'

| A. H. 1027—A. D. 1617.

The Emperor was very desirous of enjoying
the sport of hunting wild elephants, which he had
never yet seen, and having heard great praises of
Gujerat, and particularly of the City of Ahmeda-
bad, he resolved to go thither. Added to these
inducements for the journey, he wished to have a
sight of the ocean, of which he had heard such
wonderful relations. Intending to remain at
Ahmedabad till after the heat of summer, he sent
Miriam-ul-Zemany, andthe greatest part of the
harem to Agra; after which he set out for Gujerat,
along with Nourjehan Begum.’

When the Emperor arrived at Cambayet he
took up his residence at the garden of Sultan
Ahmed, the custom-master of that port. All the
ships in the harbour were dressed out; Jehangir
embarked ona grab, and sailed in her about two
miles.2 He remained eleven days at Cambayet and
then proceeded to Ahmedabad. On the road, he
visited the shrine of Shah Alum Bokharee,‘ a very

2 R, B. 1.375.
. 2R,B. 1, 401.

3 R. Bf. 415.
4 Ibid, 419; Price reverses the order of the march, Ahmedabad (207)
being mentioned as the place to which the Emperor went first, ;

so | HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

celebrated Mohammedan saint, who is reported to
have worked astonishing miracles.

From Mendow to Cambayet is one hundred and
twenty-four cose, and from thence to Ahmedabad
twenty-one cose. The city did not answer the
high expectation which Jehangir had formed, from
the descriptions he had heard of it.! Although the
market places are extensive, yet the shops have a
mean appearance, being built of wood and roofed
with tiles.

A. H. 1027—A. D. 1618.

Shahjehan now obtained the Soobahdar of
Gujerat, in addition to his former jageer.

The Emperor stayed about two months at
Ahmedabad, and in the beginning of February set
out? with intention of proceeding to Agra, by the
way of Malwah.

' Meer Jemlah, a Persian nobleman, having
taken disgust against Shah Abbas, enteredinto the
service of Jehangir, and obtained a munseb of
fifteen hundred zat and two hundred cavalry.

_ On this march, near Malwah, Jehangir shot a
lion? which weighed seven maunds and ahalf. He
says in his Toozek, that he had killed many lions,
and amongst the rest’one at Amda that weighed
eight maunds and a half.

In the beginning of March, Jehangir arrived at

the town of Sehareh*‘ about three cose from
4R.B. 1, 423-5; Price, 205; Iqbal, 107-8 ; India of Aurangzeb (trans>
by Sarkar), 59-62.
2 R. B. I. 435 , For his dislike of the city on account of its bad climate see
B, R. Il. 43.
* 8 It was a tiger according to R. B. I. 444,
# Sajara, R. B, 11. 4,

Déhwed, the place-where the wild elephants resort.
and whither he went the next day. The road
to it was so overgrown with trees and thickets.
as to be almost impenetrable. The country people
had previously enclosed a spot with nets, and
on one side of the enclosure, a platform was:
erected on the boughs of some trees, for the
accommodation of Jehangir, Shahjehan and their
suite, which consisted only of afew favourites.
Two hundred male elephants, and a number of
females, were sent into the enclosure; two men
being mounted upon each elephant with ropes and
chains. A party of men were now sent to drive
the wild elephants into the toil, by the side where
the Emperor and Shahjehan were seated. But the
jungle was so thick, that the netting could not be
properly secured, so that the wild elephants broke
through ; however, twelve’ were taken and some of
them remarkably fine.

The weather proving very sultry, and many
people falling sick, Jehangir thought it would be
most prudent to defer his march to Agra, till the
end of the rains ; and soon after he was confirmed
in this resolution, by receiving intelligence that the
plague had made its appearance in that quarter.
He accordingly returned from Dehwed to Ahmeda-
bad. -But the intense heat of the city, and the
stagnation of the air, produced a disorder from
which few escaped. A fever which lasted two or

three days totally exhausted the patient's strength,
: , “Altoongh m many | elephants were. sot caught at least twocexcellent: oney
Fa cone,

BS

ae HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

‘and left pains in all his joints ; but the disorder did
- not prove mortal to any one. The Emperor had a
- violent attack? and was very much reduced by it.
The author of the Masir Jehangiry says, it is
astonishing how any one could have thought of
building a large city on such a spot® for that the
air is unwholesome, water scarce, and the soil so
. Sandy, that when the wind blows you are almost
suffocated with dust; that all the water which can
be procured intolerably bad, the wells being
brackish, and the tanks frothing with the soap of
the washerman ; and although the higher ranks of
people have cisterns of rain water, yet by being
kept from year to year unventilated, it is also
very unwholesome. And to complete the un-
healthiness of the place, all the neighbouring fields
are enclosed with zekoom, which is notorious for
occasioning a pestilential atmosphere. Jehangir
used to call this city Girdabad, or the city of dust.

On the 22nd of Ramzan, or 1st September 1618,
the Emperor marched from Ahmednagar for
Agra.‘

On the 16th of the month of Dey,® or December
26th, about an hour and twelve minutes before
sunrise, there appeared on the horizon a luminous
little cloud; it rose later every morning twenty-
four minutes, till on the sixteenth morning it was

2 RK. B, I1., 10, 13, 14; Khaf. I., 294; Terry, 226-7
2R, B.11., 12; Roe 473n
_’ * Ahmadabad ? R.B. II., 25 ; Roe, 4820

JEHANGIR 83.

discovered to be a comet with a dark tail’ Its eourse .
was from the sign of Scorpio to Libra. It was
generally believed to have occasioned the plague,
as well as to have prognosticated the war between
the Emperor and Shahjehan, which for seven years
so deluged the empire with blood, that there was
hardly a family but shared in the calamity.

About the same time, at Kandahar, there ap-
peared suddenly a swarm of rats, which entirely
destroyed the fruits of the earth and devoured all
the grain that was in store. Great numbers were
killed and the remainder vanished, as suddenly as
they had appeared.’

On the 15th Zilkadeh, or 23rd October, whilst
the Emperor was at Dehwed, the daughter of Asaf
Khan brought Shahjehan ason, whom Jehangir
named Aurungzebe.2. When the army arrived at
the city of Oujein, Shahjehan celebrated the birth
of the young prince, with great magnificence.‘

When the Emperor arrived on the borders of
the Ranna’s territory, Kurren came out to meet
him, and congratulated him upon the conquest of
the Dekhan.°

Morteza Khan, who was now besieging Ken
gerah,* found out that Rajah Soorej Mull was
engaged in a treasonable correspondence with the
enemy. Headvised the Emperor of the discovery :

RB. I1., 48; E.D. VI, 363 ; Iqbal, 117. Sixteen nights after this pheno

menen a star showed itself in the same quarter, Its head was luminous bu:
not fts tail,

ee ‘HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

but the artful Rajah wrote to Shahjehan that the
. whole.was a forgery of Morteza Khan to ruin him,
and he had such credit with the Prince, that he
obtained permission to come to court, to exculpate
himself. Atthis time, Morteza Khan happening
to die, the operations against Kengerah were for
some time suspended. Soorej Mull having per-
suaded Shahjehan of his innocence, accompanied
him to the Dekhan and there behaved so well, that
upon peace being restored to that quarter, he was
sent to conduct the siege of Kengerah; but much
against the Emperor’s judgment, who thought it
imprudent to trust, with such an important com-
mand, a man accused of treachery: his argu-
ments so far prevailed with Shahjehan that he
sent along with him his own Bukhshee Mohamed
Tuckee, [Taqi] to watch his actions. But no sooner
were they arrived before the place, then he quar-
relled with Mohamed Tuckee, and by artful re-
presentations obtained his recall, and Bickermajeet,
with a considerable reinforcement was ordered
there in his stead. But before his arrival at
Kengerah, Soorej Mull haddisbanded a considerable
part of the army, when he and his party fell upon ?
the rest, plundered and slaughtered them, and then
seized some pergunnahs at the foot of. the
mountains, belonging to the jageer of Etemaded-
dowlah: .

The 20th of the month of Dey, or 30th
December 1618, the Emperor encamped at the tank

of Futtehpoor! The tank was measured: and 7
found to be seven cose in circuit.

The city of Agra not being yet free from the
infection of the plague,? Jehangir continued some .
time at Futtehpoor. He visited the tomb of
Sheikh Sileem Chiesty® which has a beautiful
mosque of stone, built by order of Akber, in the
erection of which were expended five lakhs of
rupees.

When Bickermajeet arrived in Punjab, Soorej
Mull demanded a parley, which was peremptorily
refused. He was soon driven from the forts of
Mend and Mekran, and in retreating, lost many of
his men; at length he was totally dispossessed of
the lands, which had been held by his ancestors
for many generations, and it was with difficulty
_ that he escaped with his life.‘

In the latter end of this year, there appeared
in Cashmeer, a dreadful disorder, which proved
fatal to great numbers. The patient was seized
with a headache and bleeding at the nose, and
died the next day. In whatever house, this
disorder appeared, it carried off the whole
family-
: A. H. 1028—A. D. 1619

The Emperor celebrated the new year at
Futtehpoor and during this festival honoured
Shahjehan with a visit, who presented a nuzzar of

1 R, B, II., 64, 66

9R, B. Il, 65, 66; Roe, 268, 312, 326n, 327, 328, 334n, 336;
tori in India, B,D, Vi, 407, p. 62 ia Face

2B. and B. i 70-4; Prige, 209

4%. Bi. 4

= HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

jewels and other articles to the value of five lakhe
of rupees.!

_ About this time Mocurreb Khan was appointed
Soobhadar of Bahar;’ and Sirdar Khan obtained a
jageer in Mongheer, with the feudatory of Tirhoot.
_  Onthe fourth of Jemady ul Awwel or April
8th, Jehangir entered the city of Agra,’ where
Sultan Purveiz paid him his respects,* having just
arrived from Allahabad.

About this time died Shahnowaz Khan,’ the
son of the Khankhanan. He was a gallant officer,
but killed himself by excessive drinking.

Khandowran Shah Beg Khan, worn out with
age, obtained the Emperor’s permission to resign
the Government of Tatah, and in reward for his
eminent services, the pergunnah of Khooshab in
Punjab, yielding seventy-five thousand rupees per
annum was conferred upon him in jageer.®

His Majesty ordered obelisks to be erected
at the distance of every coseon the high road
from Agra to Lahore: at every third obelisk a well
was sunk, and each side of the road was planted
with trees, for the refreshment of travellers.’

After remaining five months at Agra, the
Emperor set out for Cashmeer, leaving the fort of
Agra under the command of Lushker Khan.? When
he arrived at Mehtra, Sultan Purveiz took his

JEHANGIR oF

leave,! and departed for Allahabad, where his jageer
was situated.
A. H. 1029—A. D. 1619

Khan Alum now returning from his embassy to
the Court of Persia, the Emperor went out to
meet him from the garden of Kelanore. He had
long treated him with familiar intimacy, and used
to go to his house without any ceremony. Among
the presents from Shah Abbass, was a picture of
Timour’s victory over Towk Tomish Khan. It
contained two hundred and forty portraits, amongst
which were most of Timour’s relations. The pain-
ter’s name is Keleel Mirza Sharokhoe.?

Through the management of Khan Azem, a
Sonassee fakir, named Atcher Roop, interceded
with the Emperor for Sultan Khusru, and obtained
his pardon, with permission to come to Court.®

About this time Cushtwar, situated to the
north of Cashmeer, was conquered by Dilawer
Khan, the Soobahdar.! The Emperor rewarded
him with one year’s revenue of that territory.

A. H. 1029—A. D. 1620

The road to Peerpunchal was difficult to pass
at this season of the year on account of the depth
of the snow ; but being the nearest way and as the
Emperor was desirous of arriving at Cashmeer
during the spring, he and the rest of the harem,
along with Elemadeddowlah at Rhotass till
the melting of the snow; whilst Mirza Rustam
2 RB, Bit’ 115-16
3 R.B.II., 107; Price, 216-19 gives a very interesting account af the

corroboration.

release whi
-* R, B, H., 222, 135-40.

i ‘Khan. Azem went on with a party “by
“the road of Poontch: On the road, Jehangir
. geveived intelligence of the death of Ranna Amer
Singh? upon which he dispatched Kishendoss
to invest Kurren with the title of Ranna and he
_was confirmed in all the possessions enjoyed
by his father.

When the Emperor arrived at Puckelee,? he
-sent Mehabut Khan to command an expedition
against the Afghans of Bungish. The mountains
of Puckelee are enamelled with flowers, amongst
which are violets, equal in fragrance to those
cultivated in gardens, but of a fainter colour. The
next day it rained and snowed, which made the
road so slippery that many of the baggage
elephants fell down the side of the mountains and
were killed; of those that perished thus, were
twenty-five belonging to the Emperor. They were
obliged to halt two days at Puckelee. The next
day’s march they met witb peach and apricot trees
in full blossom. Sircar Puckelee‘ is thirty-five
cose in length, and twenty-five in breadth. On the
‘west are the mountains of Cashmeer, on the north
the mountains of Kuttore, and on the south the
mountains of Poontch. He crossed the bridge
over the river Nainsook which takes its rise in the
pass between Badakhshan and Tibbet. Two new
‘<bridges were erected for the army to cross over,
toch. measuring eighteen yards in length: the

right. i mat be Maigalh; WB. 1, 1240

JEHANGIR 89

elephants swam over. He encamped on the banks
of the river Kishengung. Near this place is a
level spot about fifty yards square, where he
celebrated the festival of the new year. He was
here overtaken by Shahjehan, who had made an
excursion to see the City of Lahore.’ The whole of
the road from Kishengung to Cashmeer is by the
side of the river Behut. You go over very high
mountains, from some of which issue rapid
cataracts. This road being narrow and difficult to
pass, only Nourjehan Begum, Shahjehan, Asof
Khan and a few others were allowed to accompany
the Emperor; Khusru and the rest being ordered to
keep a day’s march behind? The first day they
were overtaken by a violent thunder storm and
obliged to take shelter in a tent which luckily had
been pitched by Motamid Khan at Bhelbass. At
the next stage Kha-ey, the Emperor, made
Motamid Khan a present of a complete suit of
clothes which he had worn himself, and promoted
him to a munseb of one thousand five hundred zat
and five hundred cavalry.‘ After passing the hills,
they descended into a delightful valley enamelled
with flowers, and proceeded with the village of
Syar. To add to the beauty of the scene, here is a
prodigious fine water-fall. The next stage was
Barahmoolah on the banks of the Behut, and here
are many pleasant seats built by the merchants of

90 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

in their boats. Here he found Dilawer Khan,
Soobahdar of Cashmeer, who was just returned
from Cushtwar.' This territory which was then
newly acquired, is sixty cose from Cashmeer: the
revenue is estimated at a lakh of rupees. In
the beginning of April, Jehangir entered his new
palace near the tank of Dull. Here is a strong
stone fort began in the time of Akber, and finished
in the present reign. The next day Dilawer Khan
brought in chains the Rajah of Cushtwar, who was
informed that if he would leave his sons at court
as hostages for his future good conduct, he should
be set at liberty, and that unless he gave such
security he should be committed to one of the
fortresses of Hindostan: he consented to the
requisition. Jehangir, after passing three days at
his new palace, entered Serrynagur, the capital
city of Cashmeer. Its longitude is 105 degrees and
latitude 35 degrees.

Mohammedanism first appeared in Cashmeer
about the commencement of the eighth century of
the Hegira; and in 772 of the same era, or A. D.
1370, Meer Syed Aly Hamadany went thither and
gained many proselytes. In A. H. 994 or A. D.
1585, the whole subah was conquered. Sheikh
Abulfazel in his Akbernamah, has computed
Cashmeer to be in length 120 cose, and in breadth
from 10 to 25 cose. Jehangir ordered an actual
measurement to be made, when it was found to be
sixty-six cose long and from ten to twenty-seven
cose broad.®

2 RB. IL, 139-40

JEHANGIR | 91

The Khankhanan now sent the Emperor in-
telligence of the revolt of Nizam-ul-Mulk, and
other chiefs in the Dekhan, who after possessing
themselves of some of the dependencies of Balla-
khaut and Berar, had now besieged the fort of
Ahmednagar. A supply of twenty lakhs of rupees
was ordered to be sent from Agra to the Khan-
khanan.!

About this time, Mehabut Khan gained a
considerable victory over the Afghans of the
territory of Bungish.

Dilawer Khan dying in his government of
Cashmeer,? Eradut Khan was appointed to succeed
him? About the same time died Khandowran, in
the ninetieth year of his age. He was a native of
Mehawer’Inehr, and came into Hindostan in the
service of Mirza Hakeem brother of the Emperor
Akber. He was possessed of integrity, valour and
liberality in an eminent degree.°®

Jehangir was now, for the first time, attacked
with an asthma,’ which annually returned upon
him with increased violence, till it terminated his
existence.

In the month of October, Jehangir set out for
Punjab, and in November arrived at Lahore’ where
he resided at a new palace on which was expended
seven lakhs of rupees.

R.
R. B.
R,. B. II., 172
And the, Tuzuk says, he performed great services for the dynasty ;
B, II., 172
.It., 12-13; 35, 176

183

Il.

92 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

It had been a practice in Rajore, for the
widows of Mohammedans to bury themselves
alive with their husbands, in emulation of the
Hindu wives, who, on the like occasion, devote
themselves to flames. Just before Jehangir
arrived there, a girl of twelve years of age having
buried herself in this manner, he prohibited the
barbarous custom; and threatened with death
every one who should be found guilty of partaking
in the crime.'

A. H. 1030—A. D. 1620 .

On the Ist of Moherrem, or the 15th of Nov-
ember, the fort of Kengerah surrendered to Rajah
Bickermajeet. It is situated in the mountains
south of Lahore and had hitherto been deemed
‘impregnable, never having before been in the
possession of any Mohammedan prince."

When Dilawer Khan came to Cashmeer, to
pay his respects to the Emperor, he left the
territory of Cushtwar under charge of Nasser-
ullah Arab, who imprudently giving part of his
troops leave of absence, at the same time that he
ill-treated the natives, they rose upon him, mas-
sacred his remaining force, and made him prisoner.
The Emperor nowsent Jilal, son of the late
Dilawer Khan to reduce the country again to
obedience.®

Adil Khan, Nizam-ul-Mulk, and Koteb-ul-
Mulk, having entered into a confederacy, collect-
ed together an army of sixty thousand cavalry

R,. BB.

a
a Il. 183 ; Khat I 305-7 ; EZ. D, VI., 525-6, 527-33,
RB 1704

JEHANGIR 93 |

with which they conquered the whole territory of
Ballaghaut. The imperial troops retreated to
Mekher, and kept skirmishing with the enemy for
three months, when their supplies being cut off,
they were obliged to descend from the mountains
and encamp at Balapoor; but neither finding any
relief at that place, they retreated to the Khan-
khanan at Burhanpoor, whither the enemy
followed, and laid siege to that fortress.! The
Emperor sensible of the ill effects of remaining at
such distance from the capital, resolved to return
to Agra, and to send Shahjehan again into the
Dekhan. Shahjehan’s army was now appointed to
consist of six hundred and fifty munsebdars, one
thousand Ahdees, one thousand Turkish cavalry
armed with matchlocks, five thousand men for the
service of the artillery,? and thirty-one thousand
Hindostan cavalry, with a supply of acrore of
rupees.” It was determined that Khusru should go
into the Dekhan with Shahjehan, who should have
discretionary orders to treat him in any manner
he might think proper. Motamid Khan accompanied
Shahjehan‘ and Khanjehan Khan was appointed
subahdar of Multan.
A. H. 1030—A. D. 1621
The same day that Shahjehan marched for the

Dekhan, Jehangir set out for Agra. In January
he left Delhi, visited the shrine of Humayun’ and
reached Agra in March.

TR. B. II., 188-90

2 R. B, I1., 190 gives 1000 in the text

«RB IL, 192

§R. B. IL, 196-7

94. HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

When the Emperor was last at Agra, Shah
Abbass sent him a ruby which had descended from
Ulugh Beg to the Seffy Family. On it was
originally engraved in the Nuskh character, Ulugh
Beg, sonof Sharokh Bahadre, son of Emir Timour
Goorgan. To which was added, by theorder of
Shah Abbass in Nustalikh, Shah <Abdbass, the slave of
Shah Wallayet, or the king of sanctity (Aly). The
Emperor was mightily pleased at receiving such a
relic of his ancestor; and in addition to the
former inscriptions, ordered the following to be

engraved: JEHANGIR SHAH, AKBER SHAH,
A. H. 1028.'

Shahzadeh Sheriar was now promoted to a
munseb of eight thousand zat, and four thousand
cavalry ; and shortly after married a daughter of
Nourjehan Begum by Shere Afkun.?

When Shahjehan arrived on the banks of the
river Chembel, he entered the thirtieth year of his
age, and was weighed with the usual ceremonies.
At the time Hymayun® went upon an expedition
against Ranna Sanka, he madea vow, that if he
gained a victory over the infidels, he would ever
after abstain entirely from the use of wine. Shah-
jehan was determined to excel his grand-father,
(ancestor) by making an offering previous to the
victory. He accordingly ordered that all the wine
in the camp should immediately be started into the
river, and the drinking vessels of gold and silver,
as well as those inlaid with precious stones, were
PRB, 195 |

' #R.B. it,
8 This is Wideatty, a a mistake for the story is told of Babur,

JEHANGIR 95

broken to pieces in his presence and distributed in
charity. At Owjein he was met by Mohammed
Tuckee, killadar of Mendow, who informed him
that the enemy having crossed the Nerbudda, had
set fire to the suburbs of Mendow. Shahjehan
immediately sent off two detachments, one
commanded by Khojeh Abdul Hassan, and the
other by Byram Beg. Being joined by Mohammed
Tuckee with a considerable reinforcement from
the fort they arrived on the banks of the Nerbudda
in the morning, and attacked the enemy, who after
suffering great slaughter fled without stopping,
till they joined the army before Burhanpoor.
Shahjehan sent orders to his generals not to cross
the Nerbudda till he could join them. !
Notwithstanding the approach of Shahjehan,
the siege of Burhanpoor was not raised, but the
Khankhanan contrived to elude the vigilance of
the besiegers, and joined Shahjehan at Mendow.
Shahjehan remained nine days at Mendow,
to refresh his men and collect sufficient stock
of grain for the next campaign. He bestowed
thirty lakhs of rupees upon the jageerdars, to
make them amends for the losses they had
sustained from the ravage and devastation of the
enemy. He then formed five divisions, each
consisting of six thousand cavalry, and appointed
for them the following commanders: Abdullah
Khan, Darab Khan, Khojeh Abdul Hassan, Rajah
Bickermajeet, and Rajah Bheem. Darab Khan
was nominally the commander-in-chief, but

96 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

Shahjehan placed the most reliance upon
Bickermajeet. These united forces drove the enemy
from Burhanpoor with great slaughter and then
follwed for eight days to Kehrkee, the residence of
Nizam-ul-Mulk, and his prime minister Amber,
but a day before their arrival there, Nizam-ul-
Mulk and his family retired to Dowletabad, and
Amber took post at the foot of the mountains with
his front secured by a swamp. The imperial
troops entered Kehrkee, and levelled with the
ground the magnificent buildings which Nizam-ul-
Mulk had been twenty years erecting at an
incredible expense.

Shahjehan left a garrison in Kehrkee, and then
marched to the relief of Ahmednagar. Amber,
alarmed at the rapid progress of the imperial
arms, when Shahjehan arrived at Putten,
sent a messenger to him, with a promise
to remove immediately from Ahmednagar, abandon
all his conquests and make the most ample
- gubmissions to the Emperor. Shahjehan insist-
ed that Nizam-ul-Mulk should resign to the
Emperor that part of his country which re-
mained unconquered at the conclusion of the last
war; and that Adil Khan, Nizam-ul-Mulk, and
Koteb-ul-Mulk should together pay a peishkush
of fifty lakhs of rupees. Amber readily acceded
to these terms ; he immediately raised the siege of
Ahmednagar and his troops joined Shahjehan at
Terminee. In consideration of this victory, Shah-
jehan ordered a stone-fort to be built to which he
gave the name of Zufferabad.' He stationed

1 Or the city of Victory.

JEHANGIR 7
garrisons throughout the Dekhan; and during the
rains cantoned his army at Zufferabad. He con-
sented to receive the peishkush half in money and
half in goods in the following proportions: from
Adil Khan eighteen lakhs, from Nizam-ul-Mulk
twelve lakhs and from Koteb-ul-Mulk twenty
lakhs. Affairs in the Dekhan were now com~-
pletely settled; and after the rains Shahjehan
marched with his army to Burhanpoor.'

Afzul Khan who was sent to the Emperor with
intelligence of Shahjehan’s great success, was
rewarded with considerable presents, and Jehangir
amongst other things sent to his victorious son
the family ruby, which he had himself received
from Shah Abbass.’

_ When the two Persian Ambassadors took
their leave, the Emperor gave to one a present
of forty thousand, and to the otherthirty thousand
rupees in money, besides khelaats and other
articles to a considerable amount. The presents
for Shah Abbass were of great value.

Jilal, son of the late Dilawer Khan, making no
progress in Cushwar, Eradut Khan, the subahdar
of Cashmeer, was ordered thither, and after having
entirely subdued the country, he placed strong
garrisons in different places.®

About this time Housheng, the nep
Alum the Emperor's great fagé
committed murder, was execute@Masat.

B. I1., 206-8 ; ; Iqbal 182-4 ; KhafI.,
+The » 208-3

aR,
a] R,
. RP on

rt

we vow

‘98 ——si“<“s WK HHISTOR'Y OF JEHANGIR.

-.. {he Emperor had now another alarming
attack of Asthma,) on which occasion Purveiz
hastened from Patna to Agra?; but before his
arrival Jehangir was out of danger.

Abdullah Khan having left the Dekhan without
permission of Shahjehan, the Emperor deprived him
of his jageer, and Etemad Roy was ordered to
conduct him back to the prince.’

The intense heat of Agra being unfavourable
to Jehangir’s complaint, he set out in November
for the northern mountains, determined if he found
that climate agree with him, to build acity there
on the banks of the Ganges, for his summer retreat,
or else to proceed to Cashmeer.‘

When Jehangir arrived at Phorloon, one of the
dependencies of Seena, he and Nourjehan Begum,
with a small party, set out to free the fort of
Kengerah:. Etemadeddowlah was at this time
very ill, and the accounts of next morning were so
unfavourable, that the Emperor and Nourjehan
Begum returned the ensuing evening to the camp,
where they found him in greatdanger. He fainted
frequently and appeared so totally exhausted, that
Nourjehan doubted whether he was sensible, and
pointing to the Emperor, asked her father whether
he knew him when he repeated the following lines
. from Anveri:

“IF A PERSON WHO WAS BORN BLIND
. WERE TO COME INTO HIS PRESENCE, ;

-: 3 BML, a2
op a a tat a7
RE

4

EE:

ee

7

HE WOULD DISCOVER NOBILITY UPON
THAT FOREHEAD WHICH ENLIGHTENS
THE WORLD.”

The Emperor stayed by his pillow several!
hours, after which he became senseless and
expired the next morning.” This great minister
was endowed with such superior abilities that the
Emperor could not reasonably be blamed for the
confidence he reposedin him. His corpse was
conducted to Agra by his son Etekad Khan, and
interned in the vizier’s own garden.

Two days after the death of Etemadeddowlah
the Emperor and the Begum recommenced their
journey to Kengerah and after travelling four days
encamped on the banks of the Bain Gungah. The
next day, the Emperor entered the fort of
‘Kengerah. It is surprisingly strong, being forti-
fied with twenty-three bastions. It measures with-
in side above a cose in length, and from fifteen to
twenty-two tenabs in breadth, and it is one
hundred and fourteen yards high. Init are two
large reservoirs of water. When the Emperor had
walked over the whole fort, he visited the temple
of Durgah, called Behwen, in its neighbourhood.
Near this temple, at the foot of the mountain, is a
volcano that emits flames continually, and the
natives who call it JOWELAH MOOKHEE believe
it to be the miraculous production of one of their
idois.®

“YR.B, IL, 222 says, he stayed there for two bours.
s Hie wi wife had passed away earlier, ¢,¢., in 1621, He died at the esd of

i oe ow: TL, 223-4

100 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

The Emperor bestowed upon Nourjehan
Begum the sole possession of all her. father’s
property of every description, with the same
jageers and distinctions that he had enjoyed.’
Her eldest brother Abdul Hassan, was appointed
to the office of principal Dewan.

In the latter end of this year, Sultan Khusru
died at Burhanpoor of the cholick.?

A. H. 1031—A. D. 1621

Mehabut Khan met the Emperor at Baba
Hassan Abdal, and when the army encamped at
Puckelee, returned to Cabul his subahdary
loaded with favours.’

When Jehangir arrived at Cashmeer, he issued
an edict forbidding the levying of an oppressive
tax, under the name of Russoom Foujdary.’

The Emperor having suffered himself to be
lulled into security by the warm professions of
inviolable friendship, so repeatedly tendered to him
by Shah Abbass, has lately kept but a small garri-
son * jin the important fortress of Kandahar, which
offered such a temptation to the Persian monarch
as he was not able to resist; he suddenly brought
a large army against it, and Abdalazeez Khan, the
Governor, having no force capable of making
resistance against such a mighty attack, surren-

1 R.B. 1., 228

9 R-B. I1., 228, Beveridge in J.R.A.S. 1907, p 599 sees no evidence of
Khusru having been potsance or strangled. Khafikhan, De Laet, the English
Factors, Della Valle {J. 58), Peter Mundy [II, 104-5], Terry 412; Pelsart,
Herbert, Von Posar and the Rajput chronicles charge Khurram with

JEHANGIR ’ 101

dered the place... The Emperor wrote immediately
to Shahjehan, and in his letter returned thanks to
God, that the success of his son’s armsin the
Dekhan would now allow him to march against
Kandahar, to wipe off the disgrace which the
Empire had suffered by the capture of that fortress.

A few months after this despatch, Zeimul
Abedeen arrived at Court, from Shahjehan, with
advice of his arrival at Mendow, from whence after
recruiting his army, he intended to proceed to
Malwah, to continue there during the rains, and
upon the breaking up of the monsoon march to the
siege of Kandahar.? He wrote the Emperor that
he did not require any reinforcements, but that in
order to ensure success, it would be necessary for
him to be vested with the full command of the army,
without being subject to any control. He requested
that on account of its vicinity to Kandahar, the
subah of Punjab might be given him in jageer, with
the fort of Runthore as a place of safety for his
family.

A. H. 1031—A. D. 1622

During the administration of Etemadeddowlah,
the ambitious views of the Begum were under
some degree of restraint; but immediately upon
the death of her worthy father, her influence and
authority became intolerable ; to Jehangir nothing
was left but the empty name of Emperor, whilst
all the arrangements of Government were solely
managed by her; so that advancement and degrada-

' #R, BIL, 234

102 ' BISTORY OF JEHANGIR

tion were the effects of her caprice or resentment.
She was alarmed at the rapid decline of the Empe-
ror’s health, being sensible that if after his death
Shahjehan should ascend the throne, she must
sink into insignificance. She therefore now began
to concert measures for frustrating his views and
to secure the continuance of her own unlimited
dominion. For the attainment of these ends,
she fixed her eyes upon Sheriar, and resolved
to raise him to the empire, confident that from
his weak capacity he would be the mere pageant
of aking, whom she could manage at her pleasure ;
and she doubted not buta liberal distribution
of the public treasure would effectually support
his pretensions to the succession. In order to
advance her schemes with the Emperor she took
every opportunity to insinuate into his mind
unfavourable sentiments of Shahjehan. She said it
was evident, from the terms of his letter, that he
only wanted to be invested with absolute power to
dethrone his father. Her creatures were indus-
trious in improving upon her base suggestions,
till at length the Emperor was perfectly persuaded
of their reality. When she had gained thus far
upon his credibility, she offered to be at the sole
expense of the operations against Kandahar; and
entreated that Sheriar might be invested with the
command, under the tuition of Mirza Rustam,
who from having been many years governor of that
province, would be able to afford'him the best
‘advice. She added that she would cheerfully
expend in this service all that she inherited from

JEHANGIR © 108

her father, with whatever else she had acquired
through his Majesty’s favour and indulgence, and
which would be found fully adequate to the main-
tenance of an army requisite for so great an
enterprise. But she required that Shahjehan’s
jageers in Agra, Ajmeer and Lahore should be
transferred to Sheriar, and that the former should
receive equivalents in the Dekhan, Malwah and
Gujerat. The infatuated Jehangir complied with
all her demands; Shahjehan was dispossessed of
his jageers which were conferred upon Sheriar,
and the former was directed to send all his troops
to court, and remain alonein the Dekhan. Officers
were appointed to see these arrangements carried
into immediate execution, and Abdal Selam,
Shahjehan’s resident at court, was sent to com-
municate these orders to his master. Sheriar was
promoted to the rank of twelve thousand zat and
eight thousand cavalry and appointed commander-
in-chief of the intended expedition against Kanda-
har. Mirza Rustam being made Etaleek to
Sheriar, and commander-in-chief of his troops,
was sent forward to Lahore, to make the neces-
sary preparations. Just about the time that the
jageers were transferred to Sheriar, Shahjehan,
ignorant of his disgrace at court, had written a
letter to the Emperor, requesting that the pergun-
nah of Dholpoor might be added to his jageer; and
confident of the Emperor’s compliance, had sent
Derya Khan to take charge of it; but Shereef-ul-
Mulk having. repaired ,thither on the part of

2 R.B, I1., 237 o

104 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

Sheriar, a skirmish ensued, in which Shereef lost
one of his eyes by an arrow. This event served
to increase the Emperor’s suspicions, as well as
to inflame the Begum’s resentment against Shah-
jehan.'

In July the Emperor proceeded on his march
from Lahore, and in September crossed the
Chenab, where he was met by Mirza Rustam. At
the same place arrived Afzul Khan, with a letter
from Shahjehan, wherein he expostulated with
his father in the most respectful and pathetic
terms. After expatiating upon the dutiful tenor
of his whole life, he modestly mentioned the
services he had so recently performed, lamented
that he should have forfeited his Majesty’s parental
regard, without the shadow of offence, for the
gratification of the ambition of a base woman, and
her degenerate son-in-law. He implored the
Emperor to do him only common justice; but
declared that whilst he was so unfortunate as to
Jabour under his royal displeasure, so far from
desiring to receive any equivalent for the jageers
of which he had been so disgracefully bereft, he
only begged leave to retire to Surat, which might
be considered as the door to the house of righte-
ousness (Mecca) where he would employ his whole
time in praying for his Majesty’s health and
prosperity. He conjured the Emperor to consult
his own better judgment, and not suffer himself to
be misled by the artful and weak counsels of the

2 RB. B, IL, 238-9 a

JEHANGIR 105

Begum, which, if pursued, must occasion his own
dishonour and destruction, and terminate in the
utter ruin of the empire.

Jehangir was fully sensible of the truth of
Shahjehan’s representations and endeavoured to
convince the Begum of their propriety, setting
forth to her the injustice of dispossessing him of
his jageers, without being able to assign any
reason for so extraordinary a conduct. But the
Begum’s resolutions were not to be altered by
arguments, however founded on reason, justice or
humanity ; and her influence over the Emperor,
was now so absolute, that she prevailed upon him
to commit a farther injury by despoiling his son of
his remaining jageers in Hissar and Duab, which
like the rest were assigned over to Sheriar.
Orders to this effect were issued to the Dewans.
In the imperial mandate which conveyed these
commands to Shahjehan, he was desired to satisfy
himself by taking in exchange any parts of the
Dekhan, Malwah and Gujerat, that he might
prefer, and had permission to reside at any of
those places; at the same time he was com-
manded to send away the troops that were re-
quired for the siege of Kandahar.’ Afzul Khan
boldly protested against these iniquitous pro-
ceedings, but was_ obliged to return to
Shahjehan without effecting anything.? By these
violent measures, the Begum meant to try
Shahjehan’s disposition and to bring matters toa
~ 1 R, BIL, 239.

2 Iqbal 194, 196 says that Nur Jahan would not permit Afzal Khan ‘to
have audience of the Emperor; R. B. II, 23-9; Khaf. I, 332.

14

106 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

speedy crisis. Should he tamely submit to this
shameful treatment, she gained her ends at once
without further trouble or opposition; and if on
the other hand he was driven into open rebellion,
he would incur the odium of commencing an
unnatural war,in which by means of her resources
she hoped to be able to crush him. In short
Shahjehan wished to proceed by mild and lenient
measures so as to avoid the appearance of dis-
obedience on his part; whilst, on the contrary,
the views of the Begum were to create an irrecon-
cileable jealousy between the Emperor and
Shahjehan and raise the fortune of Sheriar upon
the ruin of the latter. Her brother, Asof Khan was
known to be well disposed towards Shahjehan ; but
whenever the present transactions became the
subject of conversation, he had the prudence to
observe a strict silence. The Begum now finding
no opposition to her will, threw off the mask and
made no secret of her intentions. Mehabut Khan,
who was dissatisfied with Shahjehan, and who both
hated and envied Asof Khan, was ordered to court
from his government of Cabul. Although the letter
bore the seal of the Begum, yet Mehabut Khan
not being able to persuade himself that such an
entire change of measures could so suddenly have
taken place, suspected to be the artifice of Asof
Khan to draw him to court, for the purpose of
sacrificing him to hisrevenge. He therefore wrote
in answer to the Begum, that as long as Asof Khan
remained at court, he dared not obey her summons,
and that therefore, if she really wished to avail

JEHANGIR 107

herself of bis services, she must first send her
brother to Bengal and destroy Motamid Khan.

The munseb of Mehabut Khan was immediately
raised to six thousand zat and the like number of
cavalry, and his son Amanullah Khan was
nominated to the rank of three thousand zat and
one thousand seven hundred cavalry, and appointed
acting Subahdar of Cabul, whilst his father should
remain at court. Asof Khan was despatched to Agra
for the royal treasure, that had been amassing
there from the commencement of the reign of Akber.
But this was only a pretence to get him out of the
way, in order to dispel the apprehensions of
Mehabut Khan, and that he might not be a spy
upon the actions of the Begum and her party.

Abdullah Khan from Culpee, and Khanjehan
Khan from Multan,’ now paid their respects
to the Emperor, and Mirza Khan, the son of the
former, obtained in marriage a daughter of the
late Sultan Daniel. Khanjehan presented the
Emperor with a peishkush of a thousand Irakee
horses.

Hyder Beg, ambassador from Shah Abbass
arrived now at Lahore, with a letter from
Jehangir, full of declarations of friendship; he
received a khelut, but was ordered to depart
immediately.

Some very harsh expressions having fallen
from Shahjehan, upon the receipt of the royal
mandate, and which was reported to the Emperor,
he became much alarmed at what might be the
“TR, BIL, 247,

108 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

consequence of driving his son to despair, and
employed Moussavee Khan, a man of great
sagacity, to go to the Prince, under the pretence
of giving good advice, but in fact to penetrate into
his designs, that measures might be adopted
accordingly.!

When Mehabut Khan arrived at Lahore, he
assured Jehangir that unless Motamid Khan was
destroyed, it would be impossible to concert any
measures with such secrecy as to elude his
penetration; and added, that if the Emperor was
in the least scrupulous about ordering his
execution, he need only send him to Cabul on
pretence of business, when Mehabut Khan would
take care to have him despatched on the road.

A letter was now received from Etebar Khan,
the killadar of Agra, with advice that Shahjehan
had marched from Mendow, at the head of a large
army ; but that his intentions were yet unknown.’

When Afzul Khan returned to the Dekhan,
and communicated to Shahjehan all the particulars
of his father’s behaviour, with the wicked designs
of the Begum and her party, he assured him that
matters were now come to a crisis, when
remonstrances would have no avail, and that abject
submissions must terminate in utter destruction :
that in the same manner as he had _. been
dispossessed of his jageers in Hindostan, he would
gradualiy be deprived of those in Malwah, Gujerat
and the Dekhan; and when thus bereft of every

1 R.B, II., 246.
9R. B, Il., 47,

JEHANGIR 109

resource, he would be crushed without having the
power to make any resistance. Shahjehan,
convinced of the truth of these arguments, resolved
to act with vigour and accordingly without loss of
time marched his army towards Agra.’

As soon as the Emperor received certain
intelligence that Shahjehan was marching towards
Agra, Mehabut Khan and the Begum inflamed his
mind against his son, and precipitated him into
violent measures. It was agreed, that the Emperor,
under pretence of hunting, should proceed to the
river at Sultanpoor in Punjab,? and there wait till
it could be ascertained whether Shahjehan was
coming ina hostile or peaceable manner ; that if
his intentions were discovered to be inimical, the
Emperor should cross the river and oppose him ;
but if he should not commit any act of hostility,
measures suitable to the occasion might be
pursued. Having thus formed a plan of operations,
the Emperor marched from Lahore in _ the
beginning of February. Daily advices were received
from Etebar Khan of the rapid advances of
Shahjehan towards Agra. Etebar Khan did not
think it safe to remove the treasure *; Asof Khan
concurred with him in his opinion, and prepared to
join the Emperor.

A. H. 1032.—A. D. 1623.

Upon receiving the above advices, the Emperor
crossed the river at Sultanpoor, and proceeded
towards Delhi. Thus, by the wicked intrigues of

1 R, B, II., 249.
2R, BIL, 248.
9 R, B, II., 247-8.

110 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

the Begum, the whole empire was ina flame. A
dutiful son was compelled for his own preserva-
tion, to take arms against an affectionate parent.
The situation of the Emperor was truly deplorable;
in the decline of life, and whilst labouring under
a grievous bodily infirmity, to be forced into a
climate inimical to his disorder, in order to
conduct an unnatural war, which must in its
consequences prove injurious to both parties on
whichsoever side victory might declare. It was
moreover a lamentable reflection, that those very
troops, with their general, who had gained so many
victories over the enemies of the empire, should
now sheath their swords in the very vitals of their
country.

Mehram Khan, one of the eunuchs of the Serai,
together with Kheleel Beg, Fidaiy Khan, and
Motamid Khan, being accused at this time of
holding a secret correspondence with Shahjehan,
were apprehended, and upon the evidence of
Mirza Rustam, who bore an inveterate enmity
against Kheleel and another suborned witness who
swore against Mehram Khan, they were both put to
death ; Fidaiy Khan, fully exculpated himself and
was pardoned,’ but Motamid Khan was dismissed
from the service, and banished to Tatah.?

Mousavee Khan met Shahjehan at Futtehpoor,
and was received in the most gracious manner.*
The prince agreed to send with him Cazy Abdul-
azeez, to assure the Emperor, that he only wished

land promoted. R.B. II., 249,

9 R.B. Il, 249; Iqbal, 199,

JEHANGIR 111

to come to a personal explanation ; from his con-
viction that from the intrigues of the Begum, no
negotiation could be manayed through any medium,
and that he earnestly desired to have an interview
with his Majesty, before matters were carried to
extremity.

Mousavee Khan and Cazy Abdulazeez went
together to the royal camp at Lodyneoh, but the
Begum had so inflamed the Emperor against
Shahjehan, that he not only refused Abdulazeez
an audience, but ordered him into the custody of
Mehabut Khan.!

By the time the Emperor had reached Delhi,
his army was very numerous, having been joined
by Rajah Nersingh Deo, Asof Khan and many
other munsebdars with their troops. The command
of the main body was given to Mehabut Khan;
and Abdullah Khan was sent before with a large
detachment to procure intelligence, and to secure
the roads and ferries. The Emperor marched
through the city of Delhi and encamped on the
banks of the Jumna.’

When Shahjehan advanced to Belootchpoor,
the two armies were within ten cose of each other.’
Those who hoped to mend their desperate fortunes
by acivil war, told Shahjehan, that after the
indignity offered to him in the person of his
ambassador, there remained no prospect of any
success from lenient measures; and as his force
was now very superior to the Emperor’s, they
B, II. 250.

aR.
2 Rk. B. Il,
3 R. B, II, 234: Iqbal, 200-2,

112 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

advised him to come to an engagement immediately,
and not to allow the enemy time to acquire strength
by farther reinforcements. He rejected this
counsel, and declared that he had nothing farther
in view, than to effect the restitution of his jageers,
and punish the Emperor’s evil counsellors. In order
to avoid a battle, he marched about fourteen cose
into the province of Mewat. He kept with himself
five thousand cavalry, and divided the remainder
of his army into three bodies under the command
of -Darab Khan, Rajah Bickermajeet and Rajah
Bheem, who were directed to harass the imperial
army, and cut off their supplies ; hoping, that when
they were reduced to distress, the Begum and her
party would be alarmed for their safety and agree
to his terms. The Begum sent Asof Khan to oppose
these operations with a body of twenty-five
thousand cavalry, accompanied by Abdul Hassan,
Abdullah Khan and Lushker Khan. The Begum
had imprudently given the command of the van to
Abdullah Khan, who being disgusted with her
measures, only wanted an opportunity to betray
his trust.'. His design, however, was known only
to Bickermajeet, who not having time to commu-
nicate with Darab Khan, the latter made a powerful
resistance, to Abdullah Khan’s attack, and in the
action Bickermajeet was killed with a match-lock
ball* Abdullah Khan having now discovered his
intentions to Darab Khan, joined him with part
of his force. The death of Bickermajeet threw the

1-R. B. IL,
% And his fend was cut off and exhibited to the delighted Emperor.

JEHANGIR | 113

Prince’s army into confusion, but they were rallied
by Rajah Bheem, and night parted the combatants,
without either side having gained any considerable
advantage.}

The desertion of Abdullah Khan created
suspicions in the Emperor's mind against Asof
Khan and Abdul Hassan, and these fears threw his
army into great confusion.

Mehabut Khan also, alarmed at the success of
Shahjehan, and fearful of more desertions, set on
foot a negotiation through Gazy Abdulazeez, whom
he sent to Shahjehan, to assure him, that if he
would lead back his army without committing any
farther hostilities, his jageers should be restored to
him immediately on his return to the Dekhan.?
Although Shahjehan did not place much reliance
on the faith of Mehabut Khan, yet as he earnestly
wished to have his father reconciled to him, he
marched back his army without any farther
stipulations.

The Emperor crossed the Jumna at Agra and
set out for Ajmeer; whilst Shahjehan proceeded to
Mendow.® Shahjehan, on his return, gave the
Government of Gujerat to Abdullah Khan.

Etebar Khan, the eunuch, in reward for having
preserved Agra, was promoted to a munseb of six
thousand zat and five thousand cavalry with the
title of Momtaz Khan.

Sultan Purveiz joined the Emperor at Hindore
and was received with great affection. .

1 R. B, II, 255-6; Iqbal, 203-4.

3 R. B11, 262.
15

114 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

As soon as certain intelligence was received
that Shahjehan was proceeding to Mendow through
the pass of Ghattee Chanda, the perfidious
Mehabut Khan, regardless of the late treaty,
persuaded the Emperor to send Purveiz in pursuit
of him from Ajmeer. And accordingly Purveiz,
under the management of Mehabut Khan, marched
fromthence, with an army of forty thousand cavalry,
a train of artillery, and twenty lakhs of rupees.

At the same time that Shahjehan entered
Mendow, Purveiz and Mehabut Khan arrived at
Ghattee Chanda. Having now missed their aim,
they resolved to march back to Ajmeer, and return
after the rains. But at this juncture, Rustam
Khan, who from a private soldier had risen to high
rank, through the favour of Shahjehan, having
engaged in a correspondence with Mehabut Khan,
advised him and Purveiz, to push on to Mendow,
without loss of time, assuring them, that when
the armies were in sight of each other, he would
desert them with his troops. Encouraged by this
promise, Mehabut Khan and Purveiz entered the
pass of Ghattee Chanda. Shahjehan placing entire
confidence on the attachment of Rustam Khan,
sent him before with a large detachment to
impede the motions of Mehabut Khan, whilst
himself prepared to follow with the main body.

On the first and second days some slight
skirmishes passed between Rustam Khan and
Mehabut Khan, in one of which one Munsoor
Khan,’ a Portuguese, who had deserted from

1-R. B, IL, 271.

JEHANGIR . 1135

Purveiz to Shahjehan, was killed on the side of
Rustam Khan, and amongst the troops of Mehabut
Khan fell Ajeb Singh with about two hundred
Rajputs. It had been settled, that on the third
day Shahjehan should unite his forces with those
of Rustam Khan, and bring the enemy to a general
engagement. But early in the morning before the
junction was effected, Rustam Khan with Moham-
med Khan, Berkundaze Khan, and several other
munsebdars deserted to Mehabut Khan, carrying
with them the greatest part of the detachment! ;
of the remainder many dispersed different ways
and a small party returned to Shahjehan.

About this time a messenger, with a treason-
able letter from the Khankhanan to Mehabut
Khan, was intercepted; and Shahjehan in order
to keep the matter secret, instantly had the
messenger put to death. Shahjehan now crossed
the Nerbudda and retreated to Asseer,? leaving
Byram Beg with a sufficient force to dispute with
the enemy the passage of the river. Shahjehan
sent for the Khankhanan and his son, and without
any preface shewed them the intercepted letter ;
at the sight of which they were so confounded
that they were not able to frame any kind of
excuse, upon which they were given in custody to
Syed Mozuffer Khan.’

Shahjehan left the heavy baggage at Asseer,
under the charge of Rajah Gopal Doss, and then

1B. R.IL., 272-3.

116 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

proceeded to Burhanpoor with his sons.'' Here he
was joined by Abdullah Khan from Gujerat.
Gujerat was one of the jageers of Shahjehan,
and we have already mentioned that when he
marched back from Agra, he had given it in charge
to Abdullah Khan, who dispatched Wasedar, an
eunuch, with a party of new raised troops, to take
possession of the city of Ahmedabad. The Emperor
by the advice of Mehabut Khan now conferred the
subahdary of Gujerat upon Dewar Bukhsh, son of
Khusru, with Khan Azem for his Etaleek.? When
Shahjehan arrived at Mendow, he sent orders to
Kinker Doss, brother of the late Bickermajeet, and
Sessy, the Dewan of the Gujerat, to repair to him,
and bring with them the treasure, with the golden
throne inlaid with precious stones which cost five
lakhs of rupees, and a sword belt worth two lakhs
of rupees, both of which had been prepared as
presents for the Emperor. Sessy, in order to
recommend himself to the Emperor, resolved to
oppose the new governor, and the day before
Kinker Doss left Ahmedabad, himself, under
pretence of going to Shahjehan, marched to Mah-
moodabad, from whence he wrote to Nahir Khan,
Dilere Khan, and Baber Khan, Afghans, and other
neighbouring jageerdars, imparting his designs,
and requiring their assistance, to which they
readily consented. Salah, foujdar of Sircar Putten,
and Kinker Doss, suspected his treachery, but he
had a large force at command, whilst they were

3 R. B IL, 260,

JEHANGIR 117

totally unprovided with the means of opposition.
Salah withdrew secretly with near ten lakhs of
rupees, and joined Shahjehan at Mendow: Kinker
Doss also escaped with the sword belt; but the
throne was so heavy that he could not carry it
with him. Sessy wrote to his confederates, that
now was the time for carrying the scheme into
execution. Accordingly, the next morning at
day-break, they entered the city by different gates.
Wasedar took refuge in the house of Sheikh
Hyder, who betraying him to the conspirators, he
was seized and committed to prison. Mohammed
Tuckee the Dewan, and Hasan Beg the Bukshee,
were likewise discovered, and shared the same
fate. The leaders of the conspiracy broke in
pieces the inlaid throne, the gold of which they
distributed amongst their troops, and divided the
jewels amongst themselves. When Abdulla Khan
got advice of these transactions, he hastened from
Mendow to Gujerat, with only five or six hundred
cavalry, and after 20 days arrived at Berodeh.
Sessy Khan and his confederates marched out of
Ahmedabad, and encamped at the tank of
Kenkeriah, with about fifteen thousand men.
Abdullah Khan receiving intelligence of the
strength of the enemy, waited some days at
Berodeh for a reinforcement of troops, and when
they joined him, marched to Mahmoodabad.
Sessy marched to the town of Betowah, and
encamped near the tomb of Kotebul Alum.
Abdullah went on to Berantcheh, and Sessy
to the village of Beload, when the two armies were

118 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

within three cose of each other. The next day
they both drew upin order of battle; Abdullah
Khan had taken post upon broken ground, inter-
sected with hedges of zekoom, so that he was not
able to dispose of his men to the best advantage.
The centre of each began the attack; Himmut
Singh commanding that division on the side
of Abdullah Khan, and Nahir Khan that of Sessy.
Himmut Singh was shot and the elephants in
front of Abdullah’s line, frightened at the rockets,
broke in upon their own men, and threw the
troops into such confusion, that they were totally
routed. He fled to Beroatch, where he stayed
only three days, and then went to Surat, and from
thence with the remains of his army joined
Shahjehan at Burhanpoor, at the same time that
the latter had retreated from Mendow. The
Emperor raised Seffy’s munsab from one thousand
cavalry to three thousand zat and two thousand
five hundred cavalry, with the title of Seif Khan;
and Nahir Khan was promoted to three thousand
zat, and two thousand cavalry.'!

When Mehabut Khan and Purveiz arrived at
Nerbudda, opposite to the post of Byram Beg, a
brisk cannonade commenced on both sides, but
Byram Beg had secured all the boats, and defended
the fort with such obstinacy, that the enemy
despaired of effecting a passage.

There appearing no proofs of Darab Khan’s
participation in his father’s treason, Shahjehan
released him from custody, and shortly after, upon

HANGIR ' 119

a further conviction of his fidelity, was induced,to
set atliberty the Khankhanan and his other son
also. Mehabut Khan, seeing the Khankhanan
restored to confidence and favour, wrote him a
letter, intreating him to mediate a peace, which
being also agreeable to the inclination of Shahjehan
he made the Khankhanan swear upon the Koran,
that he would not betray his interest, and then
sent him to Mehabut Khan to negotiate the treaty.
It was agreed that the Khankhanan should not
cross the Nerbudda, and that his two sons should
remain with Shahjehan as hostages for their
father’s fidelity. As soon as it was known that
the Khankhanan was coming to negotiate a peace,
Byram Beg became remiss in his duty, of which
Mehabut Khan did not fail to avail himself, and in
the dead of night, crossed the river with his whole
army; when the Khankhanan regardless of his
newly plighted faith, openly joined the enemy.!
Byram Beg overwhelmed with shame at having
suffered himself to be so duped, joined Shahjehan,
who did not think it prudent to remain any longer
at Burhanpoor ; but resolved to march into Bengal
as fast as possible. He was now deserted by}many
of his ungrateful dependents. Mehabut Khan and
Sultan Purveiz went after him asfar as Ghattee
Bhenker, thirty cose from Berhanpoor, but a heavy
fall of rain spoiling all their ammunition, they
were obliged to give up the pursuit.®

be

.Il., 279.
.II,, 281.

Wd

ry

120 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

A. H. 1033—A. D. 1624

Shahjehan marched to the borders of Telin-
ganeh, the country of Koteb-ul-Mulk and proceeded
by the way of Masulipatam.’ When he approached
Orissa,? the Subahdar, Ahmed Beg Khan, nephew
of Ibrahim Khan, Subahdar of Bengal, fled to his
uncle at Dacca. Shah Kuly Khan was left with a
force to keep possession of Orissa, whilst Shahjehan
marched to Burdwan. Salah, the nephew of Asof
Khan, shut himself up in the fort ; but upon the
appearance of a siege surrendered. Byram Beg
was left to command in Burdwan, and Shahjehan
marched on to Raj Mahl.

Ibrahim Khan having collected together a
large force, proceeded from Dacca to Akbernagar,
with powerful train of artillery, and the royal
nowareh, or fleet of fighting boats. This place
was originally named Aj Mahl, and when Rajah
Mansingh made it the seat of Government, it was
for some time called Raj Mahl, and afterwards
Akbernagar. When Rajah Mansingh built the
old fort, the river ran close under it, but afterwards
retired from its bed to the distance of near a cose.
Ibrahim Khan afterwards erected a tomb for his
son onthe banks of the river, which he enclosed
with strong fortifications of stone. He abandoned
the old fort, and resolved to defend himself in the
new one, which was inaccessible on the side of the
river, and from its situation might easily be
assisted with supplies by means of the nowareh.

2. B. II., 290-1
9 Iq bal, 217 ; English Factories i in India, 1622-3, p. 315,

JEHANGIR 121

His garrison consisted of near four thousand men,
amongst whom were several Portuguese gunners,
the rest of his army encamped on the opposite side
of the river. When Shahjehan arrived at Akber-
nagar, he wrote to Ibrahim Khan that if he would
surrender, he should have a suitable jageer in any
part of Bengal that he might prefer; and that if
he wished to repair to the Emperor, he should
have a safe convoy upon evacuating the fort. He
returned for answer that his gratitude and duty
obliged him to defend the fort to the utmost extre-
mity, and that he was resolved to die in the service
of the Emperor, to whose favour and indulgence he
was indebted for everything that he possessed.'!

We must now return to the transactions at.
Court. When the Emperor entered the City of
Ajmeer, he received intelligence from Agra, of the
death of his mother Miriam-ul-Zemany, whose loss
he sincerely lamented. Sessy sent him forty-four
persons, who had been active in the late commo-
tions in Gujerat, two of whom were trampled to
death by elephants and the rest committed to
prison.

The Emperor being relieved from alarms for
the present, by the successes of Purveiz and the
retreat of Shahjehan, resolved to make an excursion
to Cashmeer, that he might avoid the summer heat
of Hindostan, which always occasioned a return
of his asthmatic complaint. He accordingly left
Ajmeer about the end of November.

By the advice of Mehabut Khan, Asof Khan

1. B. II,, 299, 408-410; Iqbal, E. D., Vol. VI.
16

122 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

was appointed Subahdar of Bengal, and had
actually set out for his Government; but the
Begum being unable to bear his absence, as she
really loved him, he was ordered back again.

Upon the death of Momtaz Khan the eunuch,
Mocurreb Khan proceeded to the Subahdary of
Agra. Allavirdy Beg, who had deserted the
service of Shahjehan, obtained the title of Motakid
Khan, and Rustam Khan was appointed foujdar of
Kenoje.

In the Dekhan, Mehabut carried all before
him. Cazy Abdulazeez, Shahjehan’s late ambas-
sador, being now in the service of Mehabut Khan,
was sent to Adil Khan, who with his confederates
had submitted to the conquerors. Amber sent
Aly Sheer to Mehabut Khan, with a letter couched
in the most abject terms, desiring permission ‘to
pay his respects, and to place his son in the
imperial service. Cazy Abdulazeez wrote to
Mehabut Khan that Adil Khan, as a farther proof
of attachment, had appointed Moulla Mohammed
Lahooree to serve under him with five thousand
cavalry. The country about Malwah was yet
hardly passable for the artillery; however, in
order to satisfy the impatience of the Emperor,
who had written repeated orders to that effect,
Mehabut Khan sent on Purveiz, whilst he
remained himself a few days behind at Burhan-
poor, for the arrival of Moulla Mohammed and
his detachment. Lushker Khan, Jadoun Roy,
Oudyjyram, and some other munsebdars, were
cantoned at Zuffernagar, for the defence of

JEHANGIR 123.

Ballaghaut; other garrisons were distributed
throughout the Dekhan; and Rezawee Khan was
stationed in Khandeis.?

When Ibrahim Khan shut himself up in the
new fort of Raj Mahl, Shahjehan took possession
of the old one. He then blockaded the new fort,,
and Romee Khan, the commandant of his artillery,,
was employed in carrying on a mine, whilst a brisk
cannonade was maintained on both sides. By
means of the nowareh, Ahmed Khan tbrew himself
into the fort, and raised the spirits of the besieged.
Shortly after, Shahjehan detached Derya Khan to
attack the camp on the opposite side of the river.
Ibrahim Khan alarmed thereat, embarked on the
nowareh with Ahmed Beg to engage him on the
river ; but proving too late to prevent his gaining
the opposite bank, Ibrahim Khan continued in the
boats to hinder any reinforcement being sent to
the enemy. A battle was fought on the eastern
bank of the Ganges, between Derya Khan and the
Bengal troops headed by Ahmed Beg, when the
latter being routed retreated to Ibrahim Khan who
sent to the fort for succour. Shahjehan, having
no boats was unable to send any assistance tc
Derya Khan, till the Telyah Rajah supplied his
want. Through his management, one thousanc
five hundred cavalry, under the command o:
Abdullah Khan, were transported over the river, ¢
few miles above Raj Mahl, and joined Derya Khan
Ibrahim Khan now arrived in his camp, and cam
immediately to action. He formed his troops int

YR. B. IL.) 295-6,

124 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

three divisions commanded by Syed Nourullah,
Ahmed Beg and himself. The conflict was, for
some time, violent on both sides. At length
Nourullah was overpowered and fled with his
division. The enemy then fell upon Ahmed Beg,
who made a gallant resistance and received several
wounds. Ibrahim Khan supported him for some
time ; but there remaining no hopes of turning the
fate of the day, his officers entreated him to retire,
representing the rashness of exposing himself to
inevitable destruction, but the gallant veteran
scorned to fly, and said he now desired nothing
more than to die in the performance of his duty
to his sovereign ; being surrounded and killed,
Abdullah Khan cut off his head and sent it to
Shahjehan. The besieged were now greatly dis-
heartened, and Romee Khan having set fire to
the mine, effected a breach in the wall of forty
yards and the fort was stormed immediately.
Many of the besieged, from the dread of the
unrelenting fury of the assailants, plunged
themselves headlong into the river, and the great-
est part perished; numbers fell by the sword, and
a few obtained quarter. Meeruck Jelayer, one of
the principal men of Bengal was taken prisoner.
The loss on the part of the besiegers was very
inconsiderable. Ahmed Beg fled to Dacca, the
capital of Bengal, where Ibrahim Khan had
deposited his treasure, and left his family. When
Shahjehan arrived at Dacca, Ahmed Beg and his
party made their submissions and were favourably
received by the conqueror. Here were found

JEHANGIR 125

twenty-five lakhs of rupees belonging to Ibrahim
Khan, and five lakhs, the property of Meeruck
Jelayer and others; five hundred elephants, four
hundred horses, with cloths, and Aggur wood of
immense value. The artillery and nowareh were
all taken. Shahjehan bestowed the following
largesses amongst his officers: to Abdullah Khan
three lakhs of rupees, to Rajah Bheem two lakhs,
to Darab Khan and Derya Khan one lakh each,
to Vizier Khan and Shujahut Khan fifty thousand
rupees each, and a lakh of rupees was set apart to
be equally divided between Mohammed Tuckee and
Byram Beg, who were absent.’

Darab Khan, the son of the Khankhanan had
remained in custody to this time; but Shahjehan
now placed such entire reliance upon him, that
he appointed him Subahdar of Bengal. He pledged
his faith in the most solemn form, and for the more
perfect satisfaction of Shahjehan, gave him as
hostages his wife and daughter, and a son of
Shanowaz Khan his brother.

Rajah Bheem, son of the Ranna, who had
always faithfully adhered to the fortune of
Shahjehan, was sent to Patna, whither Shahjehan
followed ina few days. In the subah of Bahar,
where lay most of Purveiz’s jageers, Mekhless
Khan was Dewan, and Allyar Khan foujdar. They
never thought of putting the fort of Patna into a
state of defence; but upon the approach of Rajah
Bheem, fled to Allahabad, so that the Rajah
obtained possession of the subah of Bahar without

3 Iqbal, 220-2; Iqbal H. D, VI, 409-410 ; Kha I, 344-6,

126 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

striking a blow. A few days after Shahjehan
arrived at Patna, where many of Purveiz’s officers
joined him, Syed Mobarick, killadar of Rhotass,
delivered up that important fortress, the zemindars
of Jowneah and other neighbournig places came
also with their peishkush. Byram Beg was
recalled from Burdwan, and made subahdar of
Bahar. Abdullah Khan and Rajah Bheem proceeded
to Allahabad. Derya Khan, with another detach-
ment, was sent towards Manickpoor, and Shah-
jehan followed shortly after. When Abdullah
Khan arrived at Chowsa ferry, Jehangir Kuly
Khan, Governor of Jownpoor, fled to Mirza
Rustam at Allahabad. Abdullah Khan followed
him and encamped at Jhewsee, directly opposite to
Allahabad. Derya Khan encamped at Manickpoor,
on the banks of the Ganges, whilst Rajah
Bheem advanced within four cose of Allahabad.
Shahjehan took possession of Jownpoor.2 Abdullah
Khan crossed the river to besiege the fort of
Allahabad; and Mirza Rustam prepared for a
vigorous defence.

We have already mentioned that Amber had
made the most abject concessions to Mehabut
Khan, in hopes of being entrusted with the supreme
management in the Dekhan, when he might employ
the imperial arms, to the extermination of Adil
Khan, and the establishment of his own power.
Adil Khan entertained the same views against
Amber, and was more fortunate in his negotia.

' 3 Iqbal, 221-2 ; Iqbal E. D. VI, 410-11 ; Khaf I, 346.
8 Igbal, 222-3; Iqbal HE. D, VI, 411.

JEHANGIR 127

tions. Mehabut Khan having now openly united
his interest to that of Adil Khan, Moulla
Mohammed Lahooree was apprehensive of danger
in passing through the territory of Amber, in
order to join Mehabut Khan with the promised
reinforcement of troops; wherefore a force suffi-
cient for his protection was ordered to escort him
from Ballaghaut to Burhanpoor. Amber, alarmed
at this junction, fled with Nizam-ul-Mulk, from
Kherkee to Kandahar, a frontier town of Golconda,
leaving his family ut Dowletabad. They gave out
that they were only going to Koteb-ul-Mulk, to
receive a sum of money due from him for his quota
of the expenses of the war. Mehabut Khan
directed that Moulla Mohammed, with Sirbullund
Khan, should garrison Burhanpoor; and that
Ameeneddeen, the son of the former, should
accompany Purveiz with a thousand cavalry.
When affairs were thus settled in the Dekhan,
they began their march for Bengal. Being
suspicious of the Khankhanan, his tent was always
pitched near Purveiz’s quarters, and a strict watch
kept over all his actions. When Purveiz and
Mehabut Khan approached Allahabad, Abdullah
Khan, on account of the smallness of the force,
being obliged to raise the siege, returned to his
camp at Jhewsee, from whence, accompanied by
Derya Khan and Rajah Bheem, he marched towards
Jownpoor. Shahjehan crossed the river at Benares,
and shortly after was joined by Abdullah Khan and
the two other generals. To provide against acci-
dents, Shahjehan sent his family to Rhotass. Rajah

128 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

Bheem urged Shahjehan to come to a general
engagement immediately insisting that a resolute
attack would ensure hima decisive victory ; but
Abdullah Khan opposed this rash counsel. He
explained against the folly of imagining that ten
thousand men, many of whom were raw and undis-
ciplined, should be able to combat with success,
against forty thousand of the best troops of the
empire, headed by a general of consummate abili-
ties, long experience and undaunted valour. He
recommended to him to avoid the imperial army,
and proceed with all possible expedition through
Oudh to Delhi, and again when the enemy
approached that city to retreat to the Dekhan, for
that thus by keeping them in continuous motion,
they would be so harassed, being encumbered
with heavy baggage, that they would probably
conclude a peace with him upon his own terms;
or if they should persist in continuing the war, he
would then be in a better condition to resist them.
The ardour of Shahjehan inclined him to follow
the advice of Rajah Bheem, so that the prudent
counsel of Abdullah Khan made no impression
upon his mind. Before the proper disposition could
be made for an engagement, the army of Mehabut
Khan came in sight. Roomee Khan, with the
artillery, was advanced at some distance from the
army, and being surrounded by the enemy, was
obliged to surrender, without having done the
smallest execution, although he had discharged
above a thousand balls. The whole weight of the
attack fell upon Derya Khan’s division which was

JEHANGIR : 129

soon overpowered and totally routed. Rajah
Bheem, in despair, flung himself into the midst of
the enemy, and was cut to pieces. The day was now
irrecoverably lost—yet Shahjehan undismayed,
wanted to make another assault: but Abdullah
Khan boldly opposed this unavailing temerity,
and seizing the bridle of his horse, obliged him
to retreat with the scattered remains of his army.!
All the baggage fell into the hands of the enemy,
who satisfied with their success, did not attempt
to pursue the victory any further. Shahjehan by
forced marches reached Rhotass where he remain-
ed three days during which time Sultan Morad
Bukhsh was born there. From hence Shahjehan
sent an account of his defeat to Darab Khan, and
directed him to hasten to Ghurree. But this
ungrateful and perfidious man, forgetting the
favours he had received from his prince, and
regardless of his plighted faith, looked only
to his immediate interest, and wrote word to
Shahjehan, that the zemindars having risen,
held him prisoner, so that it was impossible for
him to repair to the appointed rendezvous. The
affairs of Shahjehan being totally ruined by his
late defeat, and the defection of Darab Khan, he
stayed only three days at Rhotass, after which he
set out for the Dekhan,? through Bengal and
Cuttack, leaving behind Abdullah Khan with the
new born prince. The nephew of Darab Khan,
who had been given as an hostage for his fidelity,

1 Shahjehan’s horse was wounded. R.B. II., 294-6 ; Iqbal 229-34.
a Iqbal. 233-4 ; 238-9; E. D. VI. 414, 416.

17

3 430 ‘HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

‘was now put to death, in revenge for his uncle's
treachery.

TRANSACTIONS AT COURT. Whilst the
Emperor was at Cashmeer, Khanehzad Khan, son
of Mehabut Khan, gained a considerable victory
over the Uzbecks in Cabul. Afzul Khan, whom
Shahjehan had left at Bejapoor, now joined
Jehangir, and was received into his service with
distinguished marks of favour.’ In the winter
Jehangir returned to Lahore, where he received
intelligence of the defeat of Shahjehan, on which
occasion the munseb of Mehabut Khan was
raised to seven thousand zat and seven thousand
cavalry of two and three horses, with the Toman
Towgh.

In the Dekhan, Amber received from Koteb-
ul-Mulk the money due, and they renewed their
confederacy with an oath. They then marched
with a large force against Adil Khan, who being ©
unprepared for such an attack, was obliged to
shut himself up in Bejapoor, and then sent advice
of his situation to Mehabut Khan, who wrote
orders to all the munsebdars in the Dekhan to
march to his relief. On their approach, Amber
raised the siege, and retreated to his own country
where he was pursued by Moulla Mohammed, but
who acted with such want of caution, that Amber
surprised his camp, put him to death, and took a
great number of prisoners, of whom were twenty-
five principal officers belonging to Adil Khan, and
also Fereed Khan, whom he immediately ordered

3 Iqbal, 248.

JEHANGIR ' 131

to be put to death! Of the imperial munsebdars
taken prisoners ““were Lushker Khan, Mirza
Manucheher, and Akeedut Khan. Amber sent the’
prisoners in chain to Dowletabad. Khenjir Khan
fled to Ahmednagar, and put it in a posture of
defence. Amber soon after appeared before tie
place, but his cannon being too small to have any
effect upon the fortifications, he turned the siege
into a blockade. He then besieged Adil Khan in
Bejapoor, and possessed himself of the whole
territory of Ballaghaut. He likewise invested the
fort of Shoolapoor,' which had ever been a subject
of contention between Adil Khan and Nizam-ul-
Mulk, and the large gun called Mulkmydan being
brought from Dowletabad a breach was effected
and the place taken by storm. He then sent
Yacoob Khan, acossree, with a large force against
Burhanpoor.

In Bengal, the zemindars delivered up Darab
Khan to the Emperor, who was so enraged at the
duplicity of his conduct, that he ordered Mehabut
Khan to send him his head, and which command
was accordingly obeyed. Khanezad Khan was
now appointed Subahdar of Bengal. Abdulraheem
the late Khankhanan was ordered to court,
Mukhliss Khan was now sent from Lahore to
hasten the march of Purveiz against Shahjehan.

When Shahjehan returned to the Dekhan
Amber sent him the _ strongest assurances’ of
obedience and support, and entreated his
hasten to Burhanpoor, which was still besieged by

1 Iqbal, 236-7 ; E. D. VI. 415; Khaf I, 348 mo


132 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

Yacoob Khan, who had orders to surrender to him
all the territory of Ballaghaut. Shahjehan en-
camped at Loll Baugh. Rowrutten and the
imperial garrison in Burhanpoor continuing to
defend the place with valour and skill, Shahjehan
ordered two assaults to be made on different places,
at the same time, one headed by Abdullah Khan,
and the other by Shah Kuly Khan. Abdullah
Khan met with such a gallant resistance that he
could effect nothing; but Shah Kuly Khan got into
the fort, seized the citadel, and shut the gates;
however, for want of support, he was at length
obliged to capitulate. Shahjehan ordered another
storm, but it did not succeed; many gallant
officers and soldiers perished in these attempts.
The besieged then made a sally, but were driven
back with considerable loss, and amongst their
slain were several Rajput chiefs, dependents of
Rowrutten.’ Purveiz now appeared on the banks
of the Nerbudda, when Shahjehan raised the siege
and retreated to Ballaghaut. Abdullah Khan
being seized with a religious frenzy, left the
service of Shahjehan and settled at Indore,
to follow his devotions.” At the same time
Nussaree Khan, another of his officers, deserted
to Nizam-ul-Mulk.
A. H. 10384—A. D. 1624.

Khan Azem died about this time at Ahmeda-
bad. His father was a native of Ghuzneen, and his
mother suckled the Emperor Akber. Jehangir

othepemenpeenermenneeneanmeitnpeare
. | SM Iqbal, 243-4; E. D. VI, 418 ; Khaf I, 349-50.
© Iqbal, 244, 449; E. D. VI, 418, 419; Hedi E. D.VI, 395-6.

JEHANGIR | 133

was very fond of him, and took every opportunity
of advancing his fortune. He was a great historian,
an elegant writer, and a good poet. His body
was brought to Delhi, and interred in the cemetery
of Sheikh Nizameddeen Aulia. Upon the death
of Khan Azem, the Subahdary of Gujaret, was
conferred upon Khanjehan Khan; and Dawer
Bukhsh, the son of Sultan Khusru, was ordered
to court.

The Emperor returned to Cashmeer in the
middle of May. Sheriar was then appointed
Subahdar of Tatah. The eminent services of
Sirbullund Roy were rewarded with a munseb of
five thousand zat and five thousand cavalry, and
the title of Ramraj, the highest honorary distinc-
tion known in the Dekhan.

Soon after Shahjehan retreated from Balla-
ghaut to Burhanpoor, he was seized with a violent
fit of sickness and feeling strong compunctions
for having rebelled against his father, determined
to sue to him for pardon. He accordingly senta
letter to the Emperor, imploring forgiveness for his
undutiful behaviour. Jehangir wrote an answer
with his own hand telling him that if he would
send to court his sons, Dara Shekouh, and
Aurungzebe, and surrender the fortress of Rhotass
and Asseer, he would grant him a full pardon, with
the whole of the Dekhan for his jageer. Shah-
jehan went out to meet the Emperor’s messenger,
received the letter with the greatest respect,
placed it upon his forehead, and prostrated himself
upon the ground. He readily acquiesced in all

134 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

the articles stipulated by his father the forts war
delivered up, and his sons sent the Emperor with
a peishkush valued at.ten lakhs of rupees.!

At the same time, the late Khankhanan
arrived at court. When he came into the
Emperor’s presence, he prostrated himself upon
the ground, and was so abashed, as to be unable
to raise his head, till Jehangir mildly told him,
that whatever had happened was not to be ascribed
to his own will, but to the inscrutable decrees of
Heaven. He then ordered the officers to admit
him to his usual station within the railing.

A. H. 1034—-A. D. 1625.

Some time before this the Emperor, at the
instigation of the Begum and her brother Asof
Khan, had dispatched Fidaiy Khan to Purveiz,
directing him to send Mehabut Khan into Bengal,
and to take into his service Khanjehan Khan from
Gujerat. Fidaiy Khan now wrote to the Emperor,
that he had signified his commands to Purveiz at
Serengpoor; but that he would neither consent to
part with Mehabut Khan, nor agree to receive
Khanjehan Khan; that seeing no benefit to be
expected from accompanying the prince on his
march, he had remained at Serengpoor and written
to Khanjehan to join him as soon as possible,
The Emperor now wrote in a very angry tone to
Purveiz,* insisting upon an implicit obedience to
his former commands, respecting himself, and
adding that if Mehabut Khan did not choose to go

a 3 Iqbal, 238-45.
® Iqbal, 245; B.D. Vi. 418,


JEHANGIR 135

to Bengal, he must repair to court unattended,
whilst Purveiz remained with the army at Burhan-
poor. The pretences for ordering Mehabut Khan
to court were that he had not accounted for large
sums forfeited to government, by the dismission
of jageerdars, and that moreover he had not sent
to the Emperor the elephants taken in Bengal and
Bahar. Arebdust Ghier was sent to receive his
accounts, if he chose that mode of settlement in
preference to rendering them in person to the
dewans. Purveiz consented to receive Khanjehan
and Mehabut Khan dispatched Arebdust Ghier
to the Emperor, with the elephants, promising to
follow himself.
A. H. 1035—A. D. 1625

The Emperor arrived at Lahore on the 30th of
Mohurrem, or 2lst October 1625. Abdulraheem
was restored to the title of Khankhanan, received
a donation of a lakh of rupees, with a jageer in
Kinoje. Afzul Khan was appointed dewan of the
Dekhan. Mirza Dekhanee obtained the title of
Shahnowaz Khan.

Khojeh Birkordar having married the daughter
of Mehabut Khan unknown to his Majesty, upon
the discovery thereof, was ordered to the presence,
where he was beaten, and then committed to
prison.

A. H. 10835—A. D. 1626

On the banks of the Chenab, the Emperor
received from Zuffer Khan the head of the rebel
Ahdad, which was ordered to be placed over the
principal gate of Lahore. The 23rd of Jemady ul

136 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

Sany, or llth March 1626, he encamped on the
banks of the Behut. The Persian Ambassador
here took his leave, and received for himself, a
khelut, a khenjer inlaid with precious stones, and
thirty thousand rupees. Along with an answer to
the letter of Shah Abbass, was sent a goorj, or
mace, inlaid with diamonds, and a belt, valued
together at a lakh of rupees.

Asof Khan had flattered himself, that by
ordering Mehabut Khan to court, his ruin would
easily be compassed, but affairs took quite a
different turn from what had been expected. He
was attended by five thousand Rajput Cavalry,
resolutely determined to defend him against the
attacks of his enemies. Although Asof Khan had
been apprized of the manner in which Mehabut
Khan was coming, yet he had made no prepara-
tions to resist him, blindly confiding in his own
strength. When Jehangir was informed of the
approach of Mehabut Khan, he sent him word,
that until he had settled his accounts with the
dewans, and had satisfied all complaints, he must
not make his appearance at court. The elephants
were sent to the royal feelkhaneh; and it was
ordered that whatever Mehabut Khan had given
as a marriage portion with his daughter, to Khojeh
Birkordar, should be forfeited to the royal ex-
chequer. Fidaiy Khan was sent to receive the
money-* As soon as Mehabut Khan arrived on
the banks of the Behut, Asof Khan regardless of

9 Iqbal, 252-3 ; E. D. VI. 419-20; M J. P. 198,
2 Iqbal, 253; E. D. VI. 420; Khaf, I, 360.

JEHANGIR 137

the Emperor's safety, crossed the river with all the
troops, his own effects and family, the royal trea-
sure and the kourkhaneh!; Motamid Khan and
the Meer Toozeh being the only officers that
remained that night with Jehangir. Mehabut
Khan, convinced that this destruction was fully
intended, formed one of the boldest designs ever
carried into execution, which was to avail himself
of the present fortunate conjuncture and seize the
Emperor. Accordingly, the next morning, he
detached two thousand of his Rajputs to burn the
bridge, and oppose any attempt of opposition from
that quarter; then at the head of the remainder of
his troops, he repaired to the royal encampment.
He advanced with only two hundred men, armed
with swords and spears, and passed into the
harem. Motamid Khan, hearing a noise, went out
to enquire the occasion of it and upon discovering
the intention of Mehabut Khan, entreated him to
wait till he could inform the Emperor of his arrival $
but he and his party alighted from their horses,
pushed forward to the royal pavilion and broke
down the doors of the ghosul khaneh?2 The
Emperor came out and got into his palkee
which was standing ready at the door of
the ghosul khaneh. Mehabut Khan then made
the koornish and zemeen-bose, and coming
close to the palkee, protested that he had been
driven to this violent step in order to preserve his
own life from the machinations of Asof.Khan ; that
a Iqbal, E. D. VI., 420; Hadi, E, D. VI., 396-7.
@ Iqbal, E. D, VI., 421-2.
18

138 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

he now threw himself at his Majesty’s feet, implor-
ing his royal protection, only, entreating that if the
Emperor thought him deserving of death he might
be executed in his presence. By this time, the
tent was surrounded by the whole body of Rajputs.
Of his Majesty’s servants, there were present only
Meet Munsoor, Jewar Khan an eunuch, Firoze
Khan and two or three others, with Arebdust
Ghier, who had secretly entered into the interest
of Mehabut Khan. The Emperor was so enraged
at the insolence of Mehabut Khan, that he twice
laid his hand upon his sword with intention of
putting him to death, but was both times restrained
by the admonition of Meer Munsoor, who told him,
in Turkish, that he ought to conform to the present
circumstances, and leave it to God to inflicta
proper punishment.1 The Rajputs now crowded
into the tent, and would suffer none of Jehangir’s
servants to remain with him. Mehabut Khan then
desired to go abroad, where he would attend him,
that the people might not entertain any suspicions
of violence, but suppose that he was acting by the
Emperor’s orders. He offered his horse which
Jehangir disdained to mount, and desired to have
one of his own, which was accordingly ordered.
His Majesty asked leave to go into the harem to
change his clothes, but was refused and only allow-
ed to wait till his horse was brought from the
stable. After proceeding on horseback for the
distance of about two arrows shot, the Emperor
was obliged to alight from his horse, and mount
2 Iqbal, E. D. VI, 422. :

JEHANGIR 139

Mehabut Khan’s elephant, with a Rajput seated
before and two others behind the howdah. Mocur-
reb Khan now joining them, was permitted also to
mount the elephant, but not till after he had
received a wound from one of the Rajputs. Kidmut
Perest, Jehangir’s cup-bearer, scrambled up too
with a bottle and glass and was crowded into the
howdah with the Emperor. <A short time after,
Gudjhust Khan, darogah of the feelkhaneh,
brought to the Emperor a female elephant, himself
being mounted on the neck of the animal, and his
son placed behind the howdah. Mehabut Khan
suspecting that he would attempt to carry off the
Emperor, ordered him and his son to be imme-
diately put to death. Jehangir now arrived at
Mehabut Khan’s tent, where he was guarded by
the sons of the rebel. Mehabut Khan, upon
reflection, found he had done wrong in having
neglected to seize Nourjehan Begum and there-
fore obliged the Emperor to remount the elephant,
and return to the royal encampment to rectify
the mistake. But the Begum had eluded the pur-
suit by crossing the river and joining her brother
Asof Khan. This disappointment greatly discon-
certing Mehabut Khan, he next repaired to the
tent of Sheriar, and finding that he had also
escaped, cruelly put to death Chekjee the grand-
son of Shujahut Khan who was also with the
Emperor.’

Nourjehan Begum immediately on her arrival
at Asof Khan’s camp summoned a council of the

1 Iqbal, E, D, VI., 423; Khaf 1., 356.

140 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

principal officers of the army, upbraided them
with cowardice and disloyalty in deserting their
prince in so shameful a manner, and told them
they had no way of retriving their honour, but
by crossing the river with her the next morning,
firmly resolved to rescue him from the hands of
the rebels. The Emperor hearing of this resolu-
tion was alarmed for his life, and in order to
dissuade her and her brother from an enterprise
which exposed him to such danger, whilst he
remained in the hands of the enemy, sent to her
Meer Munsoor with his signet. Asof Khan, how-
ever, suspected the whole to be the contrivance of
Mehabut Khan who, he thought, had compelled
the Emperor to send the ring, and he, therefore,
persisted in the resolution of crossing the river in
the morning. !

The ardour and loyalty of Fidaiy Khan
would not suffer him to rest whilst the Emperor
was a prisoner, and therefore during the night, he
collected together a small body of horse and led
them to his relief. Finding the bridge destroyed,
they plunged into the river. The stream was so
rapid that six men with their horses were drowned,
and of the rest only Fidaiy Khan and six others
were able to gain the opposite shore. They
proceeded to the camp, but finding themselves
discovered, were obliged to retreat, and after
killing four or five of the enemy recrossed the river.

1 Iqbal, 259-61; E. D. VI., 423-4 ; Khaf I., 366; English Factories in India,

1624-9, pp. 151-2,
* Iqbal, 251,

JEHANGIR 141

The next morning Asof Khan and Nourjehan
Begum attempted to ford the river at the head of
their troops, but were repelled with the loss of
many men; and Asof Khan fled to his jageer in
Attock with his son Abutaleb and about three
hundred cavalry. The infant daughter of Sheriar,
who was seated in the howdah with the Begum
her grandmother, was wounded in the arm with
an arrow.! Whilst the main body was thus totally
routed, Fidaiy Khan and his division had gained
the opposite bank, and driving all before them,
repaired to Sheriar’s tent, which was guarded by a
party of Rajputs. A violent conflict ensued, and
some of Fidaiy Khan’s arrows fell near the throne
whereupon the Emperor was seated, with Mukhliss
Khan standing by his side.? Of Fidaiy’s party
were slain Syed Mozuffer and Atullah his rela-
tions, and his own horse received four wounds.
Finding it impossible to effect anything he re-
treated to Rhotass, where he arrived the next day.

The Begum now fell into the hands of Mehabut
Khan, but was well received by him, and from this
time he treated the Emperor with all the pageantry
of royalty ; whilst himself, in the capacity of
prime minister, made every disposition according
to his own pleasure. Khojeh Abdulhassan, Eradut
Khan, and Motamed Khan having sworn friend-
ship to Mehabut Khan, were allowed to join the
Emperor. Bysanker,’® the son of Mehabut Khan,

1 Iqbal, 262-3; E. D, VI., 425-6.

9 Iqbal, E. D. VI., 427.
8 Bihrosz is the correct name,

142 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

was sent to besiege Asof Khan in the fort of
Attock who surrendered upon his life being
assured him.’ The Emperor crossed the river
Attock, and Mehabut Khan went himself to the
fort, where he made prisoners Asof Khan and his
son Abutaleb with Kuleeb the son of Meermeeran.
He put to death Abdulkalek, one of Asof Khan’s
intimate friends, and at the same time was
executed Mohammed Tuckee, who had been taken
prisoner at the siege of Burhanpoor. Moulla
Mohammed Tatahvee, who had been Asof Khan’s
tutor, was put in chains, which not being properly
secured, fell off after a little motion ; this Mehabut
Khan attributed to magic and had him executed
for practising that art.

At Jilalabad, some people of the neighbouring
country paid their respects to the Emperor. The
author of Ma-fir Jehangiry says that the religion
of these people has a great affinity with that
followed in Tibet. They worship the image
of a man made of gold or stone. They marry
only one wife, unless she proves barren, or
is disagreeable to her husband. If they were to
visit a next neighbour, they go over the roof of
the house. Their city has only one gate. They
refuse no kind of food excepting pork, fowl and
fish; eating the latter, they say, occasions blind-
ness. They do not roast, but stew their meat.
When any one dies, they put on him clean clothes
and bury him witha bottle of wine and a cup.

1 Iqbal, 266-7 ; E: D, VI, 428,
8 pe igbel, 46 8.

JEHANGIR 143

The following is their form of oath; they lay upon
the fire the head of a deer or goat, and when it is
sufficiently burnt, hang it tothe bough of a tree,
where it is left, and they believe that whosoever
violates this oath will suffer some great mis-
fortune. Ifa father takes a fancy to his son’s
wife, the latter resigns her without murmuring.
His Majesty asked them, what things would
please them best, of all the productions of
Hindostan? They said a horse, a sword, some
money, and a complete suit of scarlet, all of which
were given them.

His Majesty now appointed Saduck Khan
Subahdar of Lahore, and he was ordered to punish
Jugget Singh, son of Rajah Bassoo, for having
retired to his jageerin the northern mountains.
Jehangir hunted all the way to Cabul. He
entered the city on an elephant, and money was
flung amongst the populace, as he passed through
the bazars, tothe garden of Shere Ara. A few
days after he visited the tomb of Baber, and other
neighbouring shrines.

The umurestrained licentiousness of Mehabut
Khan's Rajputs occasioned commotions amongst
the country people, and also in the camp. A party
of these men went to one ofthe royal hunting
seats where the soils were spread, and some of the
Ahdyans who were on guard there refusing to let
them enter, were seized by them and put to death.
Some of their fellow Ahdyans, with the relations
of the murdered men, complained of this outrage
to the Emperor, who desired them to point out the

144 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

offenders that they might be brought to trial.
They departed greatly dissatisfied with this delay,
and the next morning a large body of them
attacked the Rajputs and killed between eight and
nine hundred, amongst whom were some _ of
Mehabut Khan’s best friends. Intelligence was
brought him of the disturbance, but not daring to
appear during the tumult, he concealed himself in
the royal pavilion, however, through the inter-
position of the Emperor the riot in the camp
was quelled without any farther bloodshed.
In the country near five hundred Rajputs were
seized and carried beyond the mountains of
Hindukush where they were sold for slaves.
Buddy ul Zeman and Khojeh Cossim were accused
before the Emperor of having excited the tumult ;
and their defence not being satisfactory to
Mehabut Khan, he confiscated all their effects and
threw them into prison.

About this time died in the Dekhan Amber,
the famous Abyssinian general of Nizam ul Mulk.
He was a gallant and experienced soldier and
possessed proper abilities for managing the
turbulent spirits with whom he had to deal.

As the Khankhanan was repairing to
his jageer, at Kenoje, Mehabut Khan sent
orders to Syed Behweh, subahdar of Delhi, to
seize and send him to court. Healso sent orders
to Mozuffer Khan, subahdar of Agra, to keep
a watch over Dara Shekouh and Aurangzebe,
who were advanced thus far on their way to the
Emperor.

JEHANGIR 145

When Shahjehan received intelligence of the
rebellion of Mehabut Khan, he marched im-
mediately to the relief of his father, through the
pass of Nassick Terumbuk, with only a thousand
cavalry, hoping to augment his force on the road.
When he arrived at Ajmeer, Rajah Kishen Singh,
who commanded five hundred of his cavalry, died,
and all his men dispersed, so that Shahjehan had
now only half the number, with which he set out.
Reduced to this extremity he resolved to proceed
to Tatah, where he promised himself he should be
able to raise a considerable force. He marched
from Ajmeer to Nagore, from thence to the
borders of Jowdypoor, and then to Jesselmeer, the
same that Humayun pursued during the rebellion
of Shere Shah the Afghan.

In the middle of May, the Emperor set out
from Cabul for Lahore, and on his march received
intelligence that Purveiz was dangerously ill of
an epilepsy, occasioned by excessive drinking.
Dara Shekouh and Aurangzebe now joined their
grandfather, and were received with great affec-
tion.

A woman, at Agra, who before had three girls
ata birth, was now delivered of a son and three
daughters.

Mehabut Khan thinking that his power was
now fully established, hecame vain and insolent,
treating the omrahs with such contempt as filled
them with anger and disgust. The Emperor
shewed such a pliancy to his will, that he persuaded

1 Hadi E, D. VI., 397,
19

146 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

himself he had really gained his confidence ; and in
order to increase this opinion, Jehangir pretended
to communicate to Mehabut Khan every design
that was formed against him, one time advising
him to be upon his guard against the Begum, who
was plotting his destruction; and again, that the
daughter of the late Shahnowaz Khan, wife of
Abutaleb, threatened to shoot him with a match-
lock, whenever she could find an opportunity. By
this course, Mehabut Khan was lulled into a fatal
security, persuading himself that whilst the
Emperor was so much his friend, he had need to
be under no apprehension of any plot being suffered
to take effect.!

The Begum was industrious in improving
every opportunity against him. She fomented
the dissatisfaction of the omrahs, animated them
to revenge, and stimulated them to retrieve their
credit by delivering the Emperor from his capti-
vity. A storm was now ready to fall, unperceived
by Mehabut Khan, and even if he had discovered
the danger, he was unable to ward off the blow ;
for the Rajputs, his chief support, were so
much decreased in number, as to be no longer
formidable. Hoshyar Khan, one of the Begum’s
eunuchs, had raised two thousand cavalry in
Cabul, and when they were within a day’s march
of Rhotass, the Emperor suddenly ordered all
his troops under arms on pretence of a review.
When they were drawn up, Jehangir sent to ap-
-prige Mehabut Khan that the Begum was going

* Iqbal, 267-71 ; 274-5; Khaf I., 374-6,

JEHANGIR 14?

to exhibit her new raised cavalry, and for fear
she might take that opportunity to quarrel, advised
him not to suffer his Rajputs to appear, and also
to keep himself secure at home. Mehabut Khan
followed the advice of Jehangir and did not stir
abroad that day. Early next morning when the
new cavalry arrived, and with the other troops
were drawn up before the royal pavilion, Jehangir:
sent orders to Mehabut Khan to remove to some
distance. Although he was not now at a loss to
comprehend the actual state of affairs, yet not
having the power to resist, he thought it safest to
obey, and marched off with such expedition, that
notwithstanding he was shortly after pursued by
the whole imperial army, he crossed the Behut,
without molestation. The two armies encamped
on the opposite sides, and itis remarkable that
Jehangir both lost and regained his liberty on the
banks of this river.’ Afzul Khan was sent to
Mehabut Khan with orders to go and attack
Shahjehan at Tatah and to deliver up Asof Khan,
and the other prisoners, with a threat that if he
made any delay in the execution of this last re-
quisition, a force should be sent sufficient to com-
pel him. He immediately delivered up to Afzul
Khan the two sons of Sultan Daniel, but at first
refused to release Asof Khan. However, he at
last set him at liberty upon swearing not to molest
him and consenting that his son Abutaleb should
remain as an hostage a few days longer. Meha-
but Khan, after proceeding some marches towards
2 Iqbal 275-6 ; E, D, VI., 430 ; Khaf. I., 377-8,

148 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

Tatah, set at liberty Abutaleb, together with Budy
ul Zeman and Khojeh Cossim.

The following arrangements took place on the
Emperor’s arrival at Lahore. Asof Khan obtained
the subahdary of Lahore, and the vekalut with
Abdulhassan for his dewan. Afzul Khan was
appointed khanzaman, in the room of Meer Jemlah,
who obtained the office of bukhshee. Mokurrem
Khan was removed from Coach Bahar to the
subahdary of Bengal and Khanehzad Khan was
ordered to court.! A few months after, Mokurrem
Khan going in a boat to meet the Emperor’s sir-
maun, was lost in a squall of wind. Intelligence
now arrived that Mehabut Khan having quitted
the road to Tatah, had entered Hindostan, and that
at Shahabad in Bahar, Sefder Khan had seized
twenty lakhs’ of rupees that were going from
Bengal to Mehabut Khan. Sefder Khan was order-
ed to send the money to Agra, and go in pursuit of
Mehabut Khan, and the Khankhanan who had now
a jageer in the subah of Ajmeer was ordered to
join him.

A. H. 1036—A. D. 1626.

On the 7th of Sefer, or 18th October, Sultan
Purveiz died at Berhanpoor in the 38th year of his
age.2 His body was carried to Agra, and buried
ina garden of his own. The Khankhanan was
ordered to send his children and family to court.

V Iqbal, 265-9; E D. VI., 427-31; Khaf, 1., 386,
2 Iqbal, 277-9; E. D. VI., 431, 434; Herbert ed. 1638 p. (d@) says the sum
was 22 lakhs.
*8 Iqbal, 273; 279-80; E.D.VI., 429-32; Khaf, I., 382; M. J. p. 205,
Tod ascribes the death of Parvez to Khurram I., 294; II., 33; English Facto-
ries in India 1624-9, p. 152; Rev. Terry hints to that affect.

JEHANGIR 149

Abutaleb, the son of Asof Khan, obtained the
title of Shayistah Khan. Mirza Rustam Sessevy
was appointed subahdar of Bahar.

We left Shahjehan on his way to Tatah where
he arrived with only five hundred cavalry and so
dispirited, that he entertained thoughts of going to
Persia, having formerly held a correspondence
with Shah Abbass. The fort of Tatah was
defended by Shereef ul Mulk with three thousand
cavalry and two thousand infantry; he made a
sally and was driven back upon which Shahjehan
attempted to storm the place, but proved un-
successful. He now fell back, which event, with
other circumstances, made him lay aside all
thoughts of going to Persia. He had heard that
Purveiz’s life was despaired of; and Nourjehan
Begum sent him intelligence of the retreat of
Mehabut Khan, and advised him to repair to the
Dekhan, to be ready to defend himself against
any attacks. He now took to his palkee, being
unable to ride of horseback.!. When he arrived at
Gujerat, he received intelligence of the death of
Purveiz, which made him hasten to the Dekhan,
by the same _ route that Sultan Mohamed
Bhuzneevy marched to the conquest of Sumnaut.
He crossed the Nerbudda, about twenty cose from
Ahmedabad, at Champaneer ferry, and passing
over the hills of Jeeraey, belonging to the Rajah
of Baglana, proceeded to Nassick Terrumbuck,
where he had left some of his people, and there not

3 Iqbal, 273-4 ; 280-2; E. D. VI., 429, 432-3.

150 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

being any house at that place, he went on a little
farther to Khyber.’
A. H. 1036—A. D. 1627.

Imam Kuly Khan, king of Turan, no sooner
heard of Jehangir’s unkindness towards Shahjehan,
and of the rebellion of the latter, than he sent
Abdulraheem a man universally renowned for his
virtue and sanctity to act as a mediator between
the father and son. The Emperor was highly
gratified with this embassy, and sent some omrahs
beyond the borders of Cabul to meet Abdul-
raheem ; and when he approached that city, Zuffer
Khan the subahdar went out and received him
with the utmost respect. Before he reached
Lahore, Mousavee Khan brought him a rich dress
which the Emperor had worne himself, with a
khenjir inlaid with precious stones. Near the
city of Lahore, he was met by Abulhassan, the
dewan, and Eradut Khan, the bukhshee, who
carried him directly to Jehangir. He was excused
the ceremonies of the koornish and tesleem, and
seated near the throne; fifty thousand rupees were
ordered for his expenses, and the Emperor sent
him, from his own table, fourteen trays of victuals,
with a complete service of gold plate, which he
was desired to keep.

About this time died at Delhi Abdulraheem, the
Khankhanan,’ in the seventy-second year of his
age. He was one of the greatest noblemen of the

1 Iqbal, 280-2; E. D. VI., 432-3.

9 a. N. III., 583; Iqbal, 287-8; Maasir I., 50-65; Blochman Grandees of
the Mughal Empire in Akbar’s reign, 334-9; Beal Oriental Biog. Dict., p. 11.

JEHANGIR 151

empire, and had performed many signal services
under Akbar. He was a profound politician, a
great general, an eminent scholar and a good poet.
By order of the late Emperor, he translated
Baber’s Commentaries, from the Turkish into the
Persian Language, and was also well versed in
Arabick and Hindovee.

We have mentioned that Mehabut Khan
having quitted the road to Tahtah, had entered
Hindostan, and was pursued by a large army.
Thus driven to despair, by the Emperor, he
resolved to throw himself upon the mercy of
Shahjehan. He accordingly sent a faithful servant
to that prince, with a letter informing him, that
upon being assured of a full pardon, he would enter
into his service. Shahjehan readily embraced this
offer, and sent him a most gracious letter, with
the impression of his hand to increase his confi-
dence ; Mehabut Khan with two thousand cavalry!
taking the route of Rajpipleh, and the territory
of Bihrjee, joined Shahjehan at Kyber. He pre-
sented a nuzzir of one thousand mohurs, and
a diamond worth seventy thousand rupees, with
other valuable articles. He was honoured with
an elephant, a horse, and a sword and khenjir inlaid
with precious stones.

As soon as Jehangir heard that Mehabut
Khan had joined Shahjehan, he appointed Khan-
jehan Khan Sepahsillar.2 Khanjehan had frequent-
ly invited Abdullah Khan to a conference, and
~ ® Iqbal, E. D. VI., p. 434

“1.
2 Iqbal, 277-9; E. D. VI., 431, 434; English Factories in India, 1624-9,
pp. 153, 204.

152 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

when he was at Indore, leading a life of retirement
and devotion, sent him the most solemn promises
of safety ; relying upon which Abdullah Khan went
to Burhanpoor. For some time Khanjehan treated
him with great respect, and pretended to consult
him upon all occasions, but one day when he came
attended only by asingle servant, he was suddenly
seized and thrown into prison. Khanjehan wrote
an account thereof tothe Emperor who ordered
that Abdullah Khan should be sent to the fort of
Asseer. But this perfidy met with a just
punishment, for three days after he was killed by
the same Abdullah Khan, who sent his head to the
Emperor Shahjehan.

In the beginning of March Jehangir set out
for Cashmeer. He was now unable to support the
summer heat in Hindostan, so that this journey
was morea matter of necessity than any of his
former ones. He celebrated the festival of the
new year on the banks of the Chenab, and the next
day proceeded on his journey.’ Upon receiving
intelligence of the death of Mokurrem Khan,
subahdar of Bengal, he appointed Fidaiy Khan to
that government, who stipulated to remit annually
to court five lakhs of rupees for the Emperor, and
the like sum for Nourjehan Begum.

'. Whilst the Emperor was at Cashmeer, he had
a violent attack of his disorder, which the
physicians apprehended would have been fatal.
He, however, recovered from immediate danger,
but continued for some time to have such a

3 Palki was the only conveyance his health would now permit him to use.

JEHANGIR 183°

shortness of breathing, that he found it painful to
be carried about even in a palkee ; his appetite was
entirely gone, and he even refused opium, to which
he had been accustomed above forty years. He
had no inclination for anything but grape wine.
Sheriar was now seized with a disorder called
the daus’saleb by which he lost all his hair, and
was in such acondition, that the physicians ad-
vised him to goto Lahore to try the change of air.
Dawer Bukhsh, or Bolaky, the son of Khusru, who,
in order to secure the interests of Sheriar, had by
the Begum’s contrivance been put into his hands,
was now entrusted to the charge of Eradut Khan.
In order to divert himself, the Emperor went
to see the sport of fishing at Matcheebawun,
Atchewel and Weernag. From thence he set out
for Lahore, and visited his favourite shooting
place at Byramgullah. At the bottom ofa high
mountain, a wall was built for resting a matchlock,
and the country people driving the deer down the
side of the mountain, afforded Jehangir excellent
sport in shooting them. It now happened that a
foot soldier was driving a deer before him, and his
foot slipping, he fell down the mountain and was
killed, which so affected Jahangir that he left off
shooting and retired to his tent in STS Simeey


154 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

his disorder increased daily. He proceeded from
Byramgullah to Tahneh and from thence to Rajore.
He commenced this stage, according to his usual
custom, about three o’clock in the afternoon. On
the road he called for a glass of wine, but was not
able to swallow it, and was with difficulty carried
on to his tent. He breathed with the utmost
difficulty during the night, and expired on Sunday
morning, the 28th of Sefer, A. H. 1037, or 28th
of October 1627, in the sixtieth year of his age, and
twenty-second of his reign.

Jehangir, on his accession to the throne, dis-
played considerable talents for governing,’ but
from the natural pliancy of his disposition,® with
his unfortunate addiction to indolence and plea-
sure, he became involved in difficulties, from which
he had not resolution to extricate himself.

A. H. 1037—A. D. 1627

Jehangir possessed considerable literary abi-
lities. He added some chapters to the Emperor
Baber’s Commentaries,‘ in the Turkish Language.
He also wrote his own Memoirs in the Persian
Language, containing a minute account of the
political and private conduct of his life, from the
commencement of his reign to the end of the
twelfth year: they are universally admired for the
purity, elegance and simplicity of the style; and
he appears in general, to have exposed his own
eo bah, 223 | E. D. VI., 435; M. J., 217; Khaf I., 338; Abdul Hamid
E. D. VIL, 5.

§ Roe, 147-8... «
3 For his-qualities and disposition sea Purchas III., p. 11; Terry p. 440,

Letters received 111., 856; Roe, 103, 224, 257, 273, 325, 328, 338, 447 ;

389;
‘B.D. V1I., 448; Pelsart 6, 32-3.
|. RB. OL 269. 120. 210-0.

JEHANGIR 155

follies and weaknesses with great candour and
fidelity : when he had completed the memoirs of
twelve years, he distributed several copies“ of them
amongst his children and principal officers of his
court. He continued these memoirs, with his
own hand, till the commencement of the seven-
teenth year of his reign; when, finding himself,
from his ill-health, unable to proceed, he from that
period to the time of his death employed Motamid
Khan as his amanuensis.? The whole of the
continuation is exceedingly scarce; the compiler of
this history not having been able to procure a
sight of any other copy than the one which was
lent him by his friend Colonel Polier.

In proof of the honesty with which he con-
fesses his follies, we shall shew in what manner he
speaks of his addiction to drunkenness :—He
says® that at the age of fifteen, he went along
with his father to Attock, against the tribe of
Youse Zie, when one day, having separated from
him on a hunting party, and being exceedingly
thirsty and fatigued, Shah Kuly, the commandant
of the artillery, told him that if he would drink a
cup of wine, it would completely refresh him.
He followed this man’s advice, and drank a cup of
sweet white wine, which he found so delicious, that
from that time he became fond of liquor, and daily
increased his dose, till at length he expressed
juice of the grape had no effect upon him: cons-
tantly, for nine years, he drank, of double distilled

1. B. IL, 26.

9 R, B. Il., 246; E-D, VI., 280.
8 Rk. B,.I., 307-10 ; Roe, 99, 190, 222, 226,

156 | HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

spirits, fourteen cups in the day and six cups at
night,’ which he says, were altogether equal to
six Hindostan seers, or English quarts. At
this time he had hardly any appetite, his daily
food being a chicken, with little bread and some
radishes.* By a continuance in this course, his
nerves became so affected, that he was obliged to
get somebody to lift the cup to his mouth. He
then discovered his case to Hakeem Hemam, one
of his father’s physicians and intimate companions,
who freely told him, that if he persisted in this
way six months longer, his disorder would be
absolutely incurable. Having a great affection
for the friend, and confiding in his medical skill,
he gradually lessened the daily quantity, and
reduced the strength of the liquor, by diluting it
with two parts of wine, and with the help ofa
small dose of philonium, at the end of seven years,
brought himself to be a satisfied with six cups
daily. For fifteen years, he drank at this rate,
taking the whole at night, excepting on Thursday,
the day of his accession; and Friday, the most
holy night in the week with the Mohammedans,
when he totally abstained from strorig drink®; on
Thursday he also abstained from eating flesh as
well as on ‘Friday, on account of it’s being his
father’s birth day.‘ After some time he left off
the philonium, and in place of it took opium. At
the age of forty-six his daily dose of opium was

IR, BL, 8.
. 9» Blockman [Calcutta Review, 1869) has turnips.
*R, B, 1., 20.
RB. 1, 184.-

JEHANGIR : 157

eight ruttees,! six of which he took about an hour
after sunrise, and two at nine at night.

His mind was strongly tinctured with super-
stition, of which we shall produce some instances. ?
The first public proof which he gave of this weak-
ness, is described himself. When he was at
Ajmeer, in A. H. 1023 or A.D. 1614, he was
afflicted with a fever and a violent headache,
which at first he endeavoured to conceal from
every one, transacted business in public as usual ;
but in a few days this disorder became so violent
that he was obliged to confine himself and consult
his physicians. By their advice he abstained from
the use of wine for three days, which, only serving
the more to exhaust his strength and spirits they
permitted him totake to it again; andin a few days
he was entirely out of danger. As soon as he had
acquired sufficient strength to enable him to go
abroad, he visited the shrine of Moyeneddeen
Chiesty, and as he considered his recovery to have
been obtained from Heaven, through his mediation,
he resolved to have his ears bored and wear ear-
rings, in token of his bondage to this pretended
saint.2 Accordingly when he was_ perfectly
recovered, he had his ears bored, and ever after
wore a magnificent pearl in each. His example was
eagerly followed by people of all ranks ; and pearls,
to a considerable amount, were bestowed upon

1 A rutty is equal to eight grains.
9 As regards his religious beliefs see Monserrate, Maclagen J. A. S. B.

1896, I., 53,55,62 66-7,69; R. B. I., 246, 268, 361 ; II., 94, 95, 100, 176, 186;
Roe, 270, 276, 2 278-9 ; Manucci I., 158- 9; Letters received, Vol. IV., p. 10

8 The Mohammedans have adopted this ceremony from the Mosaic
Dispensation, Exodus xxi, 1-6.

bs. - ‘HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

them from the royal jewel office for this purpose.!
Another instanceis mentioned in Motamid Khan’s
continuation of the memoirs. When Jehangir
intended to change the standard weight from thirty
to thirty-six dams, he hesitated about making even
such a trivial deviation from the institutes of
Akber ; till a fakeer, named Jadroop,’ assured him,
that in the pretended divine book of the Hindus,
the seer is fixedat thirty-six dams, upon which
declaration, superstition prevailed over filial
piety ; for Jehangir believed himself to have been
actuated by a divine impulse and ordered the new
regulation to be carried into execution.2 The
following is another instance of his weakness: at
the time that Shahjehan stood high in his
affection, the prince was seized witha dangerous
fit of sickness; when his father made a vow that if
he recovered, he would never again kill any game
with a gun; and accordingly he religiously
observed his oath for five years; but upon the
breaking out of Shahjehan’s rebellion, Jehangir
thinking to bring divine vengeance upon his son
with withdrawing his own engagement with
Heaven, resumed the recreation of shooting.‘

The author of the Khelaffut ul Tewarik
suggests, that the beauty of Nurjehan Begum was
the true fatal cause of Shere Afkun’s death, and
suspects, that the charge of treason was invented
in order to persuade the world of the necessity of
~ IR. B., I 266-8

9 Roe, 343; R, B. L, 359.
3R, B.II., 108.

- aR, 8, IL. 236-7,
» § Delhi Baition,. 446-7,

JEHANGIR 189

depriving him of his life in preservation of the
public peace, and this idea has been generally
taken up by European authors,! who have written
of that time: it is, however, but justice to declare,
that this is not an opinion generally received
throughout Hindostan, and that no other Persian
historian, whom we have read, had laid this impu-
tation upon Jehangir.* The murder of Abulfazel is
an indelible stain on his character, notwith-
standing the pains which he has taken, in his
memoirs, in pleading the political expediency of so
horrid adeed.2. From the beginning to the end of
his reign, Jehangir’s disposition towards his
subjects appears to have been invariably humane
and considerate. The severities that were exer-
cised on the accomplices of Khusru’s rebellion,
were such as are usually inflicted on familiar
delinquents, in all Mohammedan countries; and
these spectacles are the less to be wondered at
there, when executions, equally cruel and diaboli-
cal, are exhibited in many parts of Europe, where
the gospel of mercy is professed and established
by law.

So long as Jehangir followed the dictates of
his own judgment, by preferring to all other
considerations, the ease and prosperity of his
subjects, and whilst he vigorously enforced the
wise laws of his noble father, his reign was

1 Roe is silent on the matter. Peter Mundy (Travels II., 205-6); Della
Valle I., 53-4 ; Terry (Voyage to East India), p. 403 ; Manuéci. I., 161-2
278 PE 113-5 ; Iqbal, 23-4, 55 ; E.D. V., 404; Khaf. I., 265-7; “M..
(3
3 R.B.I., 25; Hadi, 10; Khaf.1,, 223: Asad Beg E. D, VI., 156-60; '
Takmil zs. D. Vi., 107; M. J. E, D, VI, 442-4 8 :

a ‘

160 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

glorious and happy; but when he embraced the
soft allurements of pleasure, and abandoned him-
self to indolence and dissipation, he became the
dupe of an ambitious woman,' who, with a view of
maintaining her own unlimited sway over the
empire after his death, practised upon him the
basest artifices? ; she precipitated him into violent
acts of injustice against a son whom he tenderly
loved ; and the intestine wars which ensued shook
the very throne, and made the empire a scene of
blood and devastation for the space of seven years.

Jehangir had three sons and two daughters,
by the following empresses :—

By the daughter of Rajah Bhogwandoss,
Sultan Nissa Begum, born in A. D. 1586; and
Sultan Khusru, father to Sultan Dawer Bukhsh, or
Bolaki, born in 1587. He died in the Dekhan, in
the year 1622. ,

By the daughter of Khojeh Hassan, Sultan
Purveiz, born in the year 1589.

By the daughter of Rajah Keysoodoss Ratore,
Bahar Banu Begum, born in 1590.

By the daughter of Rajah Oudysingh, Sultan
Khorum (afterwards Shahjehan) born in 1592.

1 Roe, 325.

2 Iqbal E. D. VI., 405; Hadi E. D, VI., 398-2 ; M. J. 76-7; Terry, 406;
Roe, 88, 89, 235, 256, 270, 337, 338; Peter Mundy II., 206; Della Valle 1.,
54: Bernier, 5; Pelsart, 50.

REGULATIONS
ESTABLISHED BY

JEHANGIR
TAKEN FROM HIS OWN MEMOIRS.

THE FIRST YEAR OF THE REIGN.

The first order which Jehangir issued on his accession to the
throne, was for the construction of the golden chain of justice. It
was made of pure gold, and measured thirty yards, consisting of
sixty links, weighing four maunds of Hindostan.* One end of the
chain was suspended from the royal bastion of the fortress of
Agra, and the other fastened in the ground near the side of the
river. The intention of this extraordinary invention was that if
the officers of the courts of law were partial in their decisions, or
dilatory in the administration of justice, the injured parties might
come themselves to this chain, and making a noise, by shaking the
links of it, give notice that they were waiting to represent their
grievance to his Majesty.

An edict was issued containing twelve general regulations, in
substance as follows :—

Tue First.—Positively abolishes the collection of duties,
arising from Tumgha and Meer Bhery; together with the taxes of
every description, which the jageerdars, throughout the empire,
had been used to levy for their own private benefit.

Tue SEconp.—To prevent robberies, and for the convenience
of travellers, it is commanded, that mosques and serais be built, and
wells dug in all deserted places; and every encouragement given
for people to settle on and cultivate such lands, If these places
are situated in any of the jageer lands, those improvements are to
be made at the expense of such jageerdars; but where they are

* About four hundred pounds avoirdupois.
21

162 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

: partof the khalseh lands, the charges shall be defrayed by the
officers of government.

Tue Tuirp.—That no person shall open any package of
merchandize, in the road, without the express permission of the
proprietor.

Tue Fourtu.—That throughout the empire, no officer of
government shall claim the property of any deceased Mussalman
or Hindu, his whole estate, real and personal, shall be possessed
solely by his heirs. Provided he leaves no heirs, then officers
appointed for this particular purpose shall take an inventory of
the effects ; and the produce thereof shall be applied to the building
of serais, repairing bridges and digging tanks and wells.

Tue Firtu.—No person shall be allowed to make or sell
wine, or any other inebriating liquor.

Tue SixtH.—No person on a journey shall be suffered to take
up his abode in the house of any man, wsthout his free consent.

Tue SEVENTH.—No Magistrate shall, of his own authority,
order any one to be deprived of his ears or nose for the commission
of any crime whatsoever.

Tue EicHtu.—The officers of the khalseh and jageerdars are
positively prohibited from the practice of forcibly taking the ryot’s
lands and cultivating them for their own benefit.

Tue Nintu.—No aumil of the khalseh, or jageerdar, shall
eontract a marriage with any inhabitant of his district, without his
Majesty’s express permission.

Tue Tentu.—Hospitals are ordered to be erected in all the
great cities throughout the Empire and the charges for attendance
and medicines to be defrayed by the khalseh.

Tue ELgventu.—In imitation of the late Emperor, he forbids
the killing of any animals on particular days, vsz., on every
Thursday, the day of his accession,on every Sunday, because he
was born on that day, as well as on account of its being under the |
immediate influence of the sun ; besides as many days as he should
be years old commencing with his birth-day.

JEHANGIR 163

Tue TwetrtTu.—Confirms all his father’s servants in their
respective munsebs and jageers.

He also commanded that all prisoners should now be set at
liberty ; and that in future no person should be confined in any
part of the Empire, above a year, without his knowledge and
approbation.

He moreover directed the bukhshies to make enquiry and
inform him, whether any of his father’s, or his own servants,
wished to exchange their present jageers for lands situated in their
native country, to be possessed by them in the form of Altumgha,
without being subject to any alteration.

The Emperors, his predecessors, whenever they bestowed a
jageer in MELKYET or PERPETUITY were used to affix to
the patent a red seal from whence such a grant was called
ALTUMGHA.* Jehangir directed, tbat instead of red ink, the
impression of the seal should betaken upon gold leaf, whence it
was afterwards called Altoon Tumgha.t

The collection of Zekat which brought in an annual revenue
of several crores of dams, had before been remitted throughout the
empire, in confirmation of a regulation made by the late Emperor,
Jehangir now abolished the Syerjebat in Cabul, which produced
annually one crore and twenty-three lakhs of dams. When the
Zekat was collected, it fell very heavy in Cabul and Kandahar;
and the abolition of that tax, with the additional remission of the
Syerjehat, were great encouragements for the merchants of Iran
and Turan to carry ona trade in those parts that was very
advantageous to Hindostan,

The following was another of this Emperor’s .humane institu.
tions :—-In every great city throughout the Empire, as well as in

“A Turkish word signifying the red patent.
t Is also Turkish, and means the golden patent,


164 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

jageer as inthe khalseh lands, refectories were ordered to be
established, according to the size of the place, where victuals were
daily prepared for the support of the poor inhabitants, and for the
refreshment of travellers.

THE THIRD YEAR OF THE REIGN.

It had long been usual in Sylhet, and other dependencies of
Bengal, for the ryots to castrate their children, and give them to
the governors of those provinces in satisfaction of their rents, or
else to sell them. This infamous practice had, at length, become
so common, that many thousands were thus annually deprived of
their virility. To eradicate this evil, the Emperor now issued
an edict, prohibiting all persons from committing this act of
barbarity, and forbidding any one to buy or sell a castrated child,
Islam Khan, the subahdar of Bengal, was ordered to punish, in an
exemplary manner all persons convicted of this crime. He was
also directed to seize all the castrated children he could find, that
thereby anend being put to this cruel traffic, the offence might
cease of itself, as the dread of punishment, and deprivation of gain,
could not fail operating upon the minds of those monsters of the
human kind.

The sale of bang and all other intoxicating drugs was now
prohibited; and it was made criminal for them to be brought to
the public markets. Gaming houses were likewise forbidden.

THE SEVENTH YEAR OF THE REIGN.

It having been repeatedly represented to his Majesty, that the
subahdars of the distant provinces assumed particular honours due
only to royalty; an edict was issued containing the following
prohibitions :—That the subahdars and governors do not require
the Koomekee troops to furnish guards for their own persons.
That they do not exhibit elephant fights. That they do not punish
criminals, by depriving them of sight nor by mutilating their
ears or noses. That they do not make any one a Mohammedan by
compulsion. That they do not confer titles upon any of their
dependants, That they do not suffer any ofthe munsebdars to

JEHANGIR 165

pay them the compliment of the koornish or tesleem. That they
do not cause the nakareh to be beaten, at the time they are going
out of their houses. That when they give an elephant or a horse
to anyone, whether he be a servant of the Emperor, or one of their
own dependants, he shall not put the trappings or the kudjek upon
his neck, nor make the tesleem. That they do not suffer any
munsebdar to go abroad in their train on foot. That if they send
them any present, they do not put their seal upon it.

THE THIRTEENTH YEAR OF THE REIGN.

One morning a man was convicted of a capital offence; but
shortly after having passed sentence, the Emperor was induced to
mitigate the punishment. Unfortunately the favourable mandate
arrived too late ; the officer who had charge of the prisoner, having
had him executed immediately on the receipt of the death warrant.
Jehangir was greatly displeased at the officer’s precipitancy ; and
in order, effectually, to prevent such a proceeding in future, he
enacted a law, commanding, that hereafter no criminal should be
put to death before sunset, notwithstanding there should be the
most positive orders to the contrary, even from the monarch
himself.

COINS STRUCK IN THIS REIGN.
Gortp Monurs.

Noursbabhy, that of one hundred tolahs,
Noursultany, that of fifty tolahs.
Nourdowlet, that of twenty tolahs.
Nourkurrem, that of ten tolahs.
Nourmenhr, that of five tolahs.
Nourjehany, that of one tolah.
Nourany, that of half a tolah.

Rewajy, that of a quarter of a tolah,

SILVER COINS,
Kokeb Taleh, weighing 100 tolahs.

Kokeb Ekbal, fifty tolahs.
Kokeb Morad, twenty tolahs.

166 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

Kokeb Bukht, ten tolahs,

Kokeb Saad, five tolahs.

Jehangiry, one tolah.

Sultany, half a tolah.

Eisary, a quarter.

Khyer Kebool, the tenth of a tolah.

The Moburs of 100, 50, 20, 10 and 5 tolahs bave the following
inscriptions :
ON THE SIDE THIS DISTICH:
In characters of light, in gold, with the pen of divine decree.
Are written the king, the light of religion, the conqueror of
the world.
BETWEEN THE VERSES:

There is no God but God, and Mohammed is the prophet of
God.

On the reverse the following distich, which expresses the year
of the Hegira:

With this coin, like the sun, the world is enlightened.
The sun of the empire is the date thereof.

ON THE OTHER COINS WAS THE FOLLOWING DISTICH.

The face of the coin is enlightened like the sun and moon.
By Shah Noureddeen Jehangir, son of Akber Padshah,

In A. H. 1027, or 13th year of his reign, Jehangir commanded,
that in future gold mohurs should be impressed on one side with
the sign of the zodiac, in which the sun happened to be when the
money was coined ; and on the reverse the following inscription :

The face of the coin is embellished by Jehangir Shah, son of
Akber Shah.

With the year of the Hegira, and place where it was struck.*

* Continuation of Jehangir's Memoirs,

JEHANGIR 167
JEHANGIR’S PRINCIPAL ROUTES

Extracted from his Memoirs.
JEHANGIR’S ROUTE FROM LAHORE TO CABUL.

The 25th of March 1607, Jehangir left the city of Lahore, and
crossing the river Rawee, arrived at the garden of Dilamez,
situated on the western bank of that river; where he remained
four days. On Monday, the 19th, he marched to the village of
Hirbir, three cose from Lahore. The next day he halted at the
village of Jehangirpoor, one of the imperial hunting seats. He
commanded Secunder, the Jageerdar of Jehangirpoor, to erect a
strong fort at that place.

On the ist of April, he proceeded to the pergunnah of
Chandalla ; from whence in two marches, he arrived at Hafezabad.
There he halted two days, at the house erected by Meer Kovamed-
deen, the croree of that place ; and then proceeded by two marches,
to the banks of the river Chenab. On the 8th he crossed a bridge
and entered the borders of the pergunnah of Gujerat. When
Akber wason his march to Cashbmeer, he erected a fort on the
west side of the river, which he peopled with Gudgirs, and from
this circumstance it obtained the name of Gujerat ; and was formed
into a separate pergunnah. The Gudjirs were before that time
an uncivilized race, who lived chiefly by plunder.

On the 9th he encamped at Khowasspoor, four cose from
Gujerat, and which was founded by Khowass Khan, the slave of
Sheer Shah the Afghan. Two marches intervened between this
place and the river Behut on whose banks he halted. The source
of the river Behut is a fountain in Cashmeer, named Virnag, proba-
bly from a large snake having formerly been seen there. Jehangir
says, that during the life-time of his father, he went twice to this
fountain, which is about twenty cose from the city of Cashmeer ; that
its form is octagonal ; about twenty yards in circumference. The
vestiges of places of worship, without number, are to be traced
amongst the ruins and caves, which are interspersed throughout
this neighbourhood. This stream is much increased by the time
it reaches Pumpoor, which is ten cose from the city of Cashmeer.

168 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

In this quarter is produced all the saffron of Cashmeer; the
annual produce is about five hundred maunds of Hindostan.
Some of the saffron beds extend a cose, and others are of smaller
dimension. The flowers lock very beautiful at some distance, and
when they are plucked, emit a strong smell. Jehangir says, that
when he went to this spot, all his attendants were seized with the
head-ache ; and that although he was himself heated with liquor,
his head was also affected, that he enquired of the Cashmerians,
who were employed in gathering the saffron, how they found
themselves, and they answered that knew not sucha disorder.
The Behut being joined in its course on both sides by other streams,
becomes a considerable river; but its breadth, in many places, is
not more than an arrow shot. The water of this river being
turbid and unwholesome, is never used by the Cashmerians, who
drink the water of a reservoir near the city, called Dell. The river
Behut on its way to Punjab, passes through Burhamola, Pukelee
and Dumtore.

The 17th of April, he marched from the banks of the Bebut.
The 19th he arrived at the fort of Rhotass, which was built by
Sheer Shah the Afghan. It stands upon broken ground, in such
a manner, that it is not possible to conceive a stronger situation.
As this spot borders upon the country of the Teekhers, a lawless
and seditious tribe, Sheer Khan resolved to build this fort to
over-awe and restrain them. He died soon after the work was
begun, and the honor of completing it was reserved for his son
Sileem Khan, Over one of the gates is engraved on account of
the expense, which amounted to four lakhs and twenty-five thou-
sand rupees,

The 20th he marched three cose and three quarters, to Pulla,
which in the dialect of the Geekhers, signifies a bank. The 21st
he proceeded to the village of Beekher, which, in this dialect,
means a fovest. The whole of the last road lies by the side of a
delightful rivulet, whose banks are covered withthe kuner flower, °
which resembles the peach blossom ; and the tree is always in
bloom.

JEHANGIR 169

The 22nd he marched from Beekher to Hatea, This place is
called Hatea, from its founder Hatee, a Geekher. The country
which lies between Markula and Hatea, is called Bootewar. From
Rhotass to Hatea, the country is inhabited by the Bhojials, a tribe
descended from the same stock with the Geekhers,

The 23rd he marched four cose and three quarters, to Pucka.
This place is so called from its having a ferry of solid brick work ;
PUCKA in the language of Hindostan signifying SOLID WORK.
This road was so excessively sandy and dusty, that there was
great difficulty in bringing on the carriages,

The 24th he marched four cose and a half, to Gour, which in
the Geekher’s dialect signifies BROKEN.

The 25th he encamped a little beyond Rawilpindy. This
place has its name from its founder Rawil, a Hindu, and the word
PUNDY, in this country language, is A VILLAGE.

The 26th the encampment was pitched at Kherbooza. Here,
in the former times, the Geekhers, had a tower, from whence they
used to issue and plunder travellers, As the shape of the roof
bore some resemblance to a musk melon, it was therefore called
Kherbooza.

The 27th he proceeded to Calapanee, which, in tke Hindu
language means black watery, Here stands the small fort of
Markulla. This a compound of the words may and kulla, signifying
beat the cavavan; this being the place where the caravans were
generally attacked. It is the boundary of the country of the
Geekhers. They are a strange people, perpetually involved in
quarrels amongst themselves; and all the Emperor’s efforts to
reconcile them were fruitless,

The 28th he proceeded to Baba Hussain Abdal. At the distance
of a cose to the eastward of this place, is a cascade, which preci,
Pitates itself with great violence. Throughout the whole road to
Cabul, there is not such another cascade, but there are two or
three like it, the road to Cashmeer. Near the fountain, from
whence this cascade has its source, Rajah Mansingh erected a

22

170 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

small edifice. Jehangir says, he enquired of historians, as well as
of the natives of this place, regarding Hussein Abdal, but could
get no satisfactory information who he was. The place which
bears his name, is a pure fountain gushing from the skirt of a
little hill.

Here Khojeh Shemseddeen Khowaky, who for some time
acted as Vizier to Akber, built a brick terrace, in the centre whereof
is a reservoir, into which the stream flows, and from whence it is
conveyed for watering the adjacent gardens and fields. By the
side of the terrace he erected a tomb for his interment; but it was
not his lot to be buried there. Hakeem Abulfutteh Ghilany, and
his brother Hakeem Hemam, who were intimate friendsof the
Emperor Akber, were interred in that sepulchre.

On the Ist of May, he encamped at Amrohee, upon a
beautiful verdant lawn, perfectly level. At this place, and its
neighbourhood, were about seven or eight tbousand houses, the
residence of the Delzaks, a tribe of Afghans, who were guilty of
every species of oppression and outrage. Jehangir now committed
to the charge of Zuffer Khan, Sircar Attock; and ordered, that
before the return of the royal standard from Cabul, the whole tribe
of Delzaks, should be driven to Lahore, and that their Kheters, or
chiefs should be seized and imprisoned.

The 3rd, he proceeded on his march, and the day after
encamped near the fort of Attock,on the banks of the Neelab.
This fort was erected by Akber, under the immediate direction
of Khojeh Shemseddeen Khowaky. It is very strong. At this
time the water of the Neelab was so low, that it required only
eighteen boats to constructa bridge over it. As the province of
Cabul was incapable of maintaining a large army, the Emperor
gave orders to the bukhshees, that only his immediate attendants,
and particular officers, should cross the river, and that the camp
should remain at Attock till his return,

The Sth, Jehangir accompanied by the princes and some of:
his familiar companions, passed over the Neelab, in a Jaalah, and
alighted on the banks of the river Kama, which runs by Jilalabad,

JEHANGIR 171

A jaalah is a float, constructed of bamboos and straw, buoyed up
earthern pots. In this country it is called seal; and in rivers where
there are rocks, it is much safer thana boat. From hence he pro-
ceeded, after two days journey, tothe ferry of Barreh. Opposite to
this place, on the other side of the river Kama, is a fort which was
erected by Zein Khan Koka, when he was sent against the
Afghans of Yousef Zie. He expended upon it fifty thousand
rupees, and called it Noushehr, or the new city, Humayun used
to hunt wolves at this place; and Akber told Jehangir that he had
accompanied him two or three times to see this sport.

The 11th, he proceeded to Dowletabad, and the next day
encamped near a garden planted by Sheer Khan, in the environs
of Peishore. Gowr Keteree, a celebrated place of worship of the
Joegees, is situated in this neighbourhood,

The 27th, he arrived at Soorkhab, and from thence proceeded
to Chucdoolick. Here he sawa great deal of the woed called
Baloot, which is excellent fuel. The whole of this stage is over a
hard rock, but not uneven or broken.

The 28th, he came to Ab Bereck ; the next day arrived at the
new royal palace ; and on the 30th at little Cabul, from whence he
proceeded to Negramy,.

The 3rd, of June after crossing the bridge of Mustan, he
arrived atthe garden of Shehr Ara, and all the way he went this
day, money was flung to the populace. This garden pleased him
very much, and as it was Thursday, the day of his accession, he
invited his intimates to a banquet of wine. To add to their
merriment, he challenged such of them as were nearly of his own
age, to jump over arivulet, about four yards wide. Some fell into
the water; he leapedit, but remarks, that it was not with that
ability with which he had exhibited there, in the presence of his
father, about eight years before.

The garden was afterwards improved by the addition of some
adjoining lands, which Jehangir purchased from tbe proprietors,

172

HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

JEHANGIR’S ROUTE FROM AJMEER TO MANDOW

Extracted from his own Memoirs.

October 30th, he marched from Ajmeer to Rewary;
halted there seven-days

Nov.

7th to Dessabwalee, halted here three days
11th to Madhel
12th to Ramsir

This being the Taluk of Nourjehan Begum, she gavea a
magnificent entertainment, and the army halted here
eight days. During the halting days his Majesty
made excursions upon the water; some boats being
always brought along with the army, upon carriages.

Nov.

Dec.

Jan.

Z2ist To Belood, halted two days
24th To Sahal
26th To Chowsah
28th To Deogong, halted two days
Ist To Bharmehl do.
4th To Kahil do.
7th To Lassab near the pergunnah of Bhoodh.
10th Hirdera, halted six days
12th To Sowreth
14th To Birdera, halted two days
17th To Kooshtal do.
18th To Khenlore do.
20th To Howeleh, halted one day
22nd To Ankenorch, halted two days

25th To Leyaneh do
17th To Gowraneb, on the river Chambal, halted
3 days “

31st To Sultanpoor, halted one day
2nd, 1617, to Manpoor
4th To Jarduhah
7th To Roamaneh, halted two days
9th To Kanhadoss do.
12th Through the pass of Chanda Ghatty to the
village of Amjar, the boundary of Malwah.

ene

Altogether Cose ...

Cose,

1
2 3/8
21/4
11/2

Cose.

31/4
2 1/4

3 3/4

2 3/4
31/2
31/4
41/2
41/8
31/8

3 3/4
41/2

2 1/4
41/2
31/2
4 3/8
41/2
2 3/8

4 3/8

84

JEHANGIR 173

The subah isin length, from Ghaddeh to Bensowleh two
hundred and forty-five royal cose; and two hundred and thirty
cose in breadth, from Chundery to Nuzzerbar. On the east it is
bounded by Bandhown ; on the north by the fort of Nour; on the
south by Baghlaneh and onthe west by Gujerat. It isa fine
healthy country, well watered with rivers, and the soil fertile in most
kinds of grain. There vines bear fruit twice a year, in March and
and September.

In the town of Dhar is a very fine stone fort. The military
force of the Kings of Malwah before the conquest by Akber
consisted of twenty thousand cavalry. Mandow is the capital of
this subah.

CONTINUATION OF JEHANGIR’S ROUTE TO MANDOW

Tue Monru oF January, 1617.

Cose.
14th From Ajmeer to Kyerbad eee 3 5/8
15th To Sendhoreh eee 3
18th To Bejaree eee 4 2/8
20th To Bulbullee vee 4 3/8
22nd to Kuree eee 4 2/8
24th To Amerna see 27/8
26th Marched. He has here omitted the name of

the place as well as the distance,

28th To Boolkehtery eee 3 5/8
30th To Cossimkereh wee 5

Here Jehangir killed a small white deer, with four horns, two
measuring each two fingers breadth, placed just before the eyes, and
two four fingers breadth farther back, measuring each four fingers
breadth in length. The Hindus call this animal Dirdhayan, and
say that the male has four horns, and the female none at all.

1617. Cose.
February Ist to Cazeeyan vee 43/4
2nd to Kendawul oe «62:18

3rd to Culceyadeh ow 2

174 HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

Here isa palace that was built by Nassireddeen, King of
Malwah. It is surrounded with a moat. The Emperor remained
here three days and gave orders for the palace to be repaired.

The 7th of February, he arrived at the city of Owjein. Here
he saw the remains of an observatory that was built one thousand
seven hundred and sixty-five years before that time, by the
famous Rajah Bickermajeet.

On the 8th of February, the Emperor left Owjein and kept at
some distance from the army to enjoy the sports of the field. On
the 27th he encamped by a tank at the foot of the fort of Mandow.
From Ajmeer to Mandow is one hundred and fifty-nine cose.

The fort of Mandow is situated on a mountain and is
upwards of ten cose in circuit. The fort is very strong, and
has init a fine stone mosque that was built by Sultan Hous.
heng. Here is the tomb of Nassireddeen who murdered his
father Ghiasseddeen, in the eightieth year of his age. He
made two fruitless attempts to poison his parent, and the third
time he succeeded, by infusing some noxious drugs in sherbet. The
old man suspected his design, but drank it off, praying God to
forgive the parricide, being himself fully satisfied with the number
of his days. This Nassireddeen peopled a city entirely with
women, all the officers being of that sex. He is said to have had
fifteen thousand women. When Sheer Khan arrived at this tomb,
he ordered it to be beaten with a stick: Jehangir had the bones
dug up, and ordered them to be burnt; but reflecting that fire is a
ray of the divinity, he was apprehensive that this ceremony might
be the means of mitigating the parricide’s torments in hell, and
therefore commanded that his remains should be scattered in the
river Narbudda, to which element they properly belonged, for he
was drowned. The story of his death is as follows :—

He was excessively fond of bathing and one day having dived
in the moat of Culleeyadeh, and remained so long under water as
to have become senseless, one of his servants, in order to save his
life, dragged him out by the hair of his head. When he came to
himself, instead of rewarding such a service, he was so enraged at

JEHANGIR 175

the indignity of being dragged by the hair, that he ordered the
man’s hands to be cut off, In consequence of which, when a like
accident befell him again, the attendants suffered him to remain
under water till he was actually dead. This happenedin A. H.
916 or A. D. 1510.

SUBAHDARS OF BENGAL

DuRING THE REIGN OF

JEHANGIR

When appointed
A. H. A. D.

Rajah Mansingh eee 1014 1605
Kotebeddeen Khan Kokultash eee 1015 1606
Jehangir Kuly Khan wee 1016 1607
Islam Khan see 1017 1608
Cossim Khan eee 1022 1613
Ibrahim Khan wee 1026 1617
Kanehzad Khan on 1033 1624
Mokurrem Khan _ 1035 1626
Fidaiy Khan see 1036 1627

SUBAHDARS OF BAHAR

DvuRING THE REIGN OF

JEHANGIR

When appointed
A. H. A. D.

Jehangir Kuly Khan eee 1015 1606
Islam Khan vee 1016 1607
Afzul Khan eee 1017 1608
Jaffer Khan wee 1021 1612
Ibrahim Khan eee 1024 1615
Jehangir Kuly Khan eee 1026 1617
Mocurreb Khan ose 1028 1619

Mirza Rustam Seffevy wee 1036 1626

THE
ARABIC, PERSIAN, AND HINDOUEE WORDS

WHICH OCCUR IN THIS VOLUME

Abdul Azeez,

Abdul Hassan.

Abdullah Khan.

Abdulkalek.

Abdulraheem.

Abdulrahman.

Abdulrezak.

Abdulselam.

Abdulsemed.

Abed Khan,

Abul Cossim.

Abulfazel.

Abul Hussein.

Abulmozuffer.

Abusyed Mirza,

Abutaleb.

Aby Aly Sina.

Adilabad.

Adil Khan.

Afghan.

Aftabgeer, a kind of umbrella.

Afzul Khan.

Agegur wood, Lignum aloes,

Ag Mahl.

Agra.

Abdad.

Ahbdyan, the plural of, vide
Ayeen Akbery, vol. I, p. 250.

Abmedabad.

Ahmed Beg.

Abmednagar.

Ajib Singh.

Ajmeer.

Akber.

Akbernagur.

Akbernameh.

Akeedut Khan.

Allahabad.

Allah Beg.
Allavirdy Beg.
Allyar Khan.
Altoon Tumgha.
Altumgha.

Aly Akber.

Aly Kuly.

Aly Sheer,
Amanullah Khan.
Amber.

Amada.
Ameenedeen.
Ameer ul Omrah.
Amerna,

Amer Singh.
Annyroy Singhdelun.
Anowleh.
Anveri,
Aproop.

Aram Banu,
PRINCESS,”
Arebdust Ghieb.

Asof Khan.
Asseergurh.
Atagelu,
Ataleek.
Atcher Roop.
Atchewal.
Atta-ullah.
Attock.
Atyr.
Atyr
OFFENCE.

“ THE

CaLm

Jebangiry—J&HANGIR’S

Aumil, an officer of the collec.

tions.

Aurungzebe, THE ORNAMENT OF

THE THRONE.

JEHANGIR 177
Baber. 5 Bokharee.
Baglana. Bolaky.
Baha Hassan Abdal. Boolkehtery.
Bahar. Booty war.
Babar Banu Begum, Tue Budy ul Zeman.

BLoominG PRINCESS. Bukhshy—Paymaster.
Bahmenabad. Bukht ul Nissa, THE Mosr
Bain Gunga. UNFORTUNATE OF WOMEN,
Baisenker. Bulbullee.

Balaghaut. Bundeyleb.
Balapoor. Bungish.
Bang, an intoxicating liquor. Burdwan.
Barahmoolah. Burhamole,
Bareb, an Afghan tribe. Burhanpoor-
Bargee, Byram Beg.
Bary. Byramgullah.
Bedakshan.

Beejapoor. Cabul.

Beglerbegy—Great Lord, Go-
vernor Turkish.

Begum—Enmpress, Princess.

Behadre.

Behker.

Behow Singh.

Behut.

Bebwen.

Bejaree,

Belood.

Belootchpoor,

Benares.

Bengal.

Berantcheh,

Berar.

Berkeh Serai.

Berkundaze, a man armed with
a match lock, literally a
thrower of lightening,

Beroatch.

Berodeh.

Betc wah.

Bhe bass,

Bh rjee,

Bhog wandoss.

Bhojial,

Biah._ .

Bickermajeet.

Bokhara,

Calendar—A MoHoMMEDAN Monk,

Cambay, properly Khambayit,

Calmue, or Culmae.

Cashmeer,

Cazeeyan.

Cazy—A Mahommedan Judge.

Cham paneer.

Chaul.

Chandalla,

Chegh.

Chekjee.

Chembel,

Chenab.

Chenghez Khan,

Chesmech Nour—Tue Fountain
oF LicHT.

Chittagong.

Chitore.

Chewdry,
holder,

Chowgong.

Chowsa.

Cose, about 24 English Statute
miles.

Cossimkerch,

Crore—100 lakhs,

Croree—an officer of the collec.
tions.

an inferior  land-

178

Culeyadeh.

Culpee.

Currukpoor or Kherekpoor.

Cushtwar.

Cutteck.

Cutwal—Superintendent of the
Police.

D

Dacca.

Dam—a copper coin, the 40th
part of a rupee ; also a
weight. Vide Ayeen Akbery,
Vol. I, page 35.

Daniel.

Darab Khan.

Dara Shekouh—in pomp like
Darius.

Darogha—Superintendent.

Da-us-Saleb.

Dawer Buksh—Goa’s gift.

Dehwed-

Dekhan,

Delhy.

Dell.

Derya Khan.

Dewan—the officer who keeps
the accounts of great men,

Dewan Azem, or Vizier.

Dey—a Persian month.

Dhar.

Dhoolpoor.

Dilamez.

Dilawer Khan.

Dilere Khan.

Dirdhayen.

Dirjen Sal.

Dirveish—a hermit.

Doast Mohammed. ;

Doonyadar—the title given to

' the Zemindar of the Dekhan
in the reign of Jehangir.

Dowleb.

Dowletabad.

Duab—the country

“between two rivers,

situated

HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

Dumtore,
Durgah.
Dyanet Khan.

Ebtemam Khan.
Emir.

Eradut Khan.
Etaleek—vide Ataleek,
Etawah.

Etebar Khan,

Etekad Khan.
Etemadeddowlah.
Etemad Khan,
Etemad Roy.

F

Fakeer—a mendicant.

Feelkaneh—vide Ayeen Akbery,

Vol. I, page 146,
Ferah
Fereecabad.
Fereed Khan.
Fidaiy Khan.

Firman, Grant, patent mandate.

Firoze Jung.

Firoze Khan.

Firzend—son,

Futteh Jung.

Futtehabad or the
VICTORY.

G
Ganges.
Geekher.
Geeranbar.
Ghattee Bhenker.
Ghattee Chanda.
Ghiass Beg.
Ghiasseddeen.
Ghiass Zein Khan.

Ghosul Khaneh, the bath.

Ghurry.
Ghuzneen.
Girdabad.
Goa.
Golconda,

JEHANGIR 179
Gookerah, Iran—the Persian Empire at
Goorgan. large.
Goorjhek—nundineh. Irej.

Goorz—a mace.
Gopaul Doss,
Gour,
Govindwal.
Gowkundeb.
Grab—a Malabar Vessel.
Gualiar.
Gudjer.
Gudjbust Khan.
Gujerat.
Gujnal.
Gurjestan,

Hafezabad.

Hafez Jemal.

Hakeem Hemam.,

Haram.

Haroon.

Hassam Bannarassy.

Hassan Beg Bedakhshee.

Hatea.

Hemayun.

Herat.

Hillal Khan.

Himmut Singh.

Hindookush.

Hindore,

Hindostan.

Hindovee.

Hirdoss Jahlehb.

Hirhir,

Hissar.

Hoshyar Khan.

Houshing.

Howdah—or more _ properly
Howdej, isa seat placed on
the back of an elephant,

Howrel.

Hussein Khan.

Hyder Beg.

Ibrahim Khan.
Imam Kuly Khan.
Indore,

Islam Khan.
Iybek Khan.

Jadown You.

Jadroop.

Jaffer Beg Asof Khan.

Jageer—an assignment of land
of military service.

Jami.

Jan Beg.

Jehan Ara—TuHE
OF THE WoRLD,

Jehandar.

Jehangir.

Jehangirabad.

Jebangir Kuly Khan.

Jehangirpoor.

Jemady ul Awwel—an Arabian
month,

Jemady ul Sany—An
month.

Jeraey.

Jerokha—vide Ayeen
Vol. I, p. 69.

Jerokha Dursan.

Jesselmeer.

Jewar Khan.

Jhewsee.

Jilal.

Jilalabad.

Jowaleh Mukkee,

Jowdhypoor,

Jowneah,

Jownpoor or

Juggerna

Jugget |

Jumna

Janel

ORNAMENT

Arabian

Akbery,

Kaim\
Kamr

Iraky—from either of the Irake. Kandi

180

Kandahar—a frontier town of
Golconda, some call it Kand-
har.

Kangerah.

Kateb Mohammed.

Kelanore.

Keleetch Khan.

Kella—a fort.

Kelladar—governor of a fort.

Kemal.

Kendawul.

Kenkeriah.

Kenoje.

Kepuab—a long sword.

Keysoodoss.

Khaey.

Khan—lord.

Khan Alum.

Khan Azem.

Khandeis.

Khandowran.

Khanehbzad Khan,

Kbanjehan Khan,

Khankbanan.

Khansaman—steward of the
household,

Kheleel Beg.

Kheleel Mirza Sharokhee.

Khellaffut ul Tewarik.

Khelseh—the exchequer,

Khelut.

Khbenjer—a dagger.

Kherbooza.

Kherkee.

Kher war.

Khenjer Khan.

Khidmut Perest,

Kbojegee Futtebullab.

Khojeh Birghoordar.

Khojeh Cossim,

Khojeh Hassan.

Khojeh Moyeneddeen Cheishty.

Khojeh Wiess.

Khooshab.

Khooshkhubber Khan.

Khorasan.

Khotbab or prayer for the king.

Khowasspoor,

HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

Khusro,

Khyber.

Khyzer Khan.

Kinker Doss,

Kishengung.

Kishensingh.

Koka—an abbreviation of Kokul-
tash,

Kokultash—is a Turkish word
signifying foster-brother.

Koomekee—vide Ayeen Akbery,
Vol. I, p. 238.

Koornish—vide Ayeen Akbery,
Vol. I, p. 207.

Koran.

Koteb.

Kotebeddeen.

Koteb ul Alum.

Koteb ul Mulk.

Kourkhaneh, the armoury.

Kudjek, an iron spike used for
driving an elephant.

Kuneer,

Kurree.

Kuttore.

L -
Laboor,
Lalla Beg—called also Lallah
Bazbehadre.
Lodehneh.
Loll Baugh,
Lushker Khan.

M

Madarun,

Masir Jehangiry—the History of
Jebangir by Kamgar Hus-
Seiny.

Mahasingh.

Mansingh.

Manuchebr,

Mahmoodabad.

Maldah,

Mallick ul Vuzerah.

Malwah.

Mandow,

Manickpoor.

Masulipatam—properly Metchly-
putter,

JEHANGIR

Matchubawun.

Maund of Hindostan is about
80 lbs.

Mawerelnehr,
nebr,

Mecca.

Meer Bhery—vide Ayeen Ak-
bery, Vol. I, p. 290.

Meer Bukhbshee,

Meer Jemlah,

Meer Jemaleddeen
Anjeu.

Meer Kavaneddeen.

Meer Meeran,

Meer Munsoor.

Meer Saman.

Meer Syed Aly Hamdany.

Meer Toozek—vide Ayeen
Akbery, Vol. I, p. 259.

Meeruck Jelayar.

Mehabut Khan.

Mekram Khan.

Mebr ul Nissa—Tue Love .igst
oF WoMEN.

Mebtra_ or Met-hra.

Mekher.

Mekhless Khan.

Mekran.

Melkyet, proprietary.

Mend.

Mendow—-vide Mandow.

Mewat.

Miriam Mekany,

Miriam ul Zemany.

Mirza, is an abbreviation of
Emirzadeh or son of an
Emir, it is however a title
given very commonly to
Moghuls of inferior rank.

Mirza Birkboordar.

Mirza Dekhanee.

Mirza Ghazi.

Mirza Hakeem.

Mirza Khan,

Mirza Khankhanan,

Mirza Rajah.

Mirza Rustam,

Miskal.

or Mehawer’)-

Hussain

181

Mocurreb Khan.

Mohammed Ghuznevy.
Mohammed Reza Beg.
Mobammed Tuckee.

Mokeem.

Mollana Meer Kellan Hiravee.
Momtaz Khan.

Mongheer.

Monsoon—a corruption of the
Arabick word Mawsim
signifying SzasoN,

Morad.

Morad Bukhbsh—Tue Giver oF
DgsIRES OR WISHES.
Morteza Khan.
Motakid Khan.
Motamid Khan.
Moulla Meer Aly.
Moulla Mohammed Lahooree.
Moussavee Khan,
Mozuffer Hussein Mirza Seffevee.
Mozuffer Khan,
Mugh.
Mulkmydan.
Multan.
Munseb.
Munsebdar.
Munsoor Khan.
Mustefa Beg.
Mustefa Khan,
Mymoory.
N

Nagh.

Nagore.

Nahir Khan.

Nainsook.

Nassik Turbeneek, or
Terembek,

Nassireddeen.

Nassirullah Arab.

Neiy, a singer.
Nekareh, a small drum, allowed
only to people of high rank.

Nerbudda. P 8

Nereylehb Serai.
Nersingh Deo,
Nishapoor.
Nizam ul Mulk.

Nassik

182

Noureddeen.

Nourjehan, or Tue LIGHT oF
THE WorLD.

Nour Mabl, or THE Licut oF
THE SERAGLIO.

Nourullah.

Nowareh.

Nuskh—vide Ayeen Akbery,
Vol. I, p. 128.

Nussaree Khan.

Nustalikh—vide Ayeen Akbery,
Vol. I, p. 129.

Nuzzer, present, offering.

Omrah, the plural of Emir
prince noble.

Orissa.

Osium, properly osiun.

Osman.

Oudyjyram.

Oudy poor.

Oudysingh.

Ouzek—vide Ayeen Akbery,
Vol. I, p. 67.

Owdh,

Owjein, or Oujein.

Padshab Mahl.
Palkee.
Paniput.
Patna.
Peishkush—vide Ayeen Akbery,
Vol. I, p. 27.
Penjab.
Pergunnah.
Phorloon.
Poontch.
Pucka.
Pucklee.
Pulla.
Pulwel.
Punpoor.
Punpun,
Purveiz.
Patten,

HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

Rajah, an Hindoo prince, or
sovereign.

Rajah Bassoo

Rajah Bheem.

Rajah Bickermajeet

Raj Mahl.

Rajore.

Raj Pipla

Rajpoot—vide
Vol. I, p. 57.

Ramchund.

Ramraj.

Ramzan, an Arabian month,

Ranna—vide Ayeen Akbery,
Vol, 2, p. 98.

Ranna Sanka.

Rawee

Rawel Pundy.

Rezawee Khan.

Rhotass,

Rhuntore.

Rokiah Sultana Begum, or Tue
ENCHANTING PRINCESS,

Roomee Khan,

Roshenrai Begum, or THE
PRINCESS oF ENLIGHTENED
Mrnp.

Row Maldeo,

Rowrutten.

Roysingh.

Rungteh.

Russoom Foujdary.

Rustam Khan.

Rustam Zemanee.

Ayeen Akbery,

Rutty—vide Ayeen Akbery,
Vol. I, p. 93.

Ryott, subject, peasant.

Ruby-ul-Awwel, an Arabian
month.

Ruby-ul-Sany, an Arabian
month,

Saiyeed Khan.
Salah.
Samarcand,.
Sanjary.
Secunder,

JEHANGIR 183
Secundra. Shereef.
Seena. Shereef of Mecca.
Sefdar Khan. Shereef ul Mulk.
Seffy. Sheriar.
Sebareh. Shoola poor.
Seistan. Shujahut Khan.
Selima, or peaceful, secure. Shukerullab.
Sendboreh. Shumsee Towshekehee.
Sepahsillar—vide Ayeen Ak- Sief Khan.

bery, Vol. I, p. 366.

Serahperdah.

Serai, an inn for the aocommo-
dation of travellers.

Serengpoor.

Seyurghal—vide Ayeen Ak-
bery, Vol. I, p. 288.

Shaban, an Arabian month.

Shah,

Shahabad.

Shab Abbass.

Shah Alum.

Shahbaz Bahadre,

Shah Beg.

Shah Ismail.

Shahjehan,
Wor.p.

Shah Kuly Khan,

Shahpoor,

Shahnowaz Khan.

Shah Shujah.

Shab Wallayet (Aly)

Shahzadeh.

Shahzadeh Khanam.

Sharokh.,

Shayisteh Khan.

Sheer Shah.

Shebr Ara, or THE ORNAMENT
OF THE City.

Sheikh, Doctor, LEARNED IN
THE Law.

Sheikh Hyder.

Sheikh Ibrahim Kurdoozy,

Sheikh Mowdood Cheishtee,

Sheikh Nizameddeen Aulia,

Sheikh Osman Haroony.

Sheikh Sileem.

Sheker-ul-Nessa, or
SWEETEST OF WOMEN.

KING OF THE

THE

Sikry, a village where Jehangir
was born.

Sileemgurh.

Sileem Khan.

Singhasen,

Sircar, a division consisting of
a number of pergunnabs,

Sirdar Khan,

Sironje.

Sirrynagur.

Soliman Giranee.

Sonnassy.

Soobah, viceroyalty.

Soobahdar, viceroy.

Soob Kurren,.

Soodra.

Soonderdoss.

Soorej Mull.

Soorej Singh.

Soorkhbab.

Sultana, or
QUEEN.

Sultan Ahmed.

Sultana-ul-Nissa Begum, or Tue
QUEEN oF WoMEN.

Sultan Daniel.

Sultan Khorum,

Sultan Khbusre,

Sultan Morad.

Sultanpoor.

Sultan Purveiz.

Sultan Sileem, or THe Pracerun
PRINCE.

Summergurh,

Sumnaut.

Sundoly.

Sungram.

Surat.

Surbullund Khan.

PRINCESS,

184

Syar.

Syed, or a descendant of Ali
and Fatimah.

Syed Bebweh.

Syed Mobarek.

Syerjehat—vide Ayeen Ak-
bery, Vol. I, p. 351

Tahneh.

Tank, a pond.

Tanka, weight—vide Ayeen
Akbery, Vol. 3, p. 93.

Tatah.

Tatahvee.

Tebmuras.

Telinganeh-

Telya.

Tenab—vide Ayeen Akbery,
Vol. I, p. 354.

Teriac, antidote,

Tesedduck.

Tesleem—vide Ayeen Akbery,
Vol. I, p, 207.

Tibbet.

Timour.

Tirhoot.

Tooman Towgh—vide Ayeen
Akbery, Vol. I, p. 65.

Toozek Jebangiry, that
Emperor’s Memoirs written
by himself.

Towk Tomish Khan.

Tumgha. :

Tunkha.

Tunnem Bahadre,

Turan,

HISTORY OF JEHANGIR

Vakeel ul Sultanet.
Vakiah Navees.
Vekalut.

Virnag.

Vizier Khan,
Vizier ul Memalek.
Vizier ul Mulk.

U
Ulugh Beg.
Uzbeck.

WwW
Wefadar.

Yacoob Khan.
Yeadgar Aly Sultan.
Yousef Zelekha,
Yousef Zie,

Zat—vide Ayeen Akbery, Vol. I.

Zein ul Abedeen.

Zekat—vide Ayeen Akbery,
Vol. I.

Zekoom. °

Zemeenbose.

Zemindar, landholder.

Zemindary.

Zilhejeb, an Arabian month.

Zilkadeh, an Arabian month,

Zufferabad.

Zuffer Khan.

Zuffernagur.

¢

END OF VOLUME THE FIRST.


-Zaona sz



